Getting Your PhD
A Practical Insider’s Guide
Getting Your PhD
A Practical Insider’s Guide
Harriet Churchill and Teela Sanders
© Harriet Churchill and Teela Sanders 2007
First published 2007
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or
private study, or criticism or review, as permitted under the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, this publication
may be reproduced, stored or transmitted in any form, or by
any means, only with the prior permission in writing of the
publishers, or in the case of reprographic reproduction, in
accordance with the terms of licences issued by the Copyright
Licensing Agency. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside
those terms should be sent to the publishers.
SAGE Publications Ltd
1 Oliver’s Yard 
55 City Road
London EC1Y 1SP
SAGE Publications Inc.
2455 Teller Road
Thousand Oaks, California 91320
SAGE Publications India Pvt Ltd
B 1/I 1 Mohan Cooperative Industrial Area
Mathura Road, Post Bag 7
New Delhi 110 044
SAGE Publications Asia-Pacific Pte Ltd
33 Pekin Street #02-01 
Far East Square 
Singapore 048763
Library of Congress Control Number 2006938309
British Library Cataloguing in Publication data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the
British Library
ISBN 978-1-4129-1993-7
ISBN 978-1-4129-1994-4 (pbk)
Typeset by C&M Digital (P) Ltd., Chennai, India
Printed in Great Britain by The Cromwell Press Ltd,Trowbridge,Wiltshire
Printed on paper from sustainable resources
Contents
Acknowledgements
x
List of Contributors
xi
Introduction
1
About this book
1
A Gap in Support for PhD Students? 
2
Enhancing Doctoral Success: the Changing Shape of the PhD in the
UK Context
4
Personal Development Planning 
7
What This Book Does and Does Not Do 
7
Overview of Chapters
8
Part I
Negotiating the Research Process
11
1
Motivations for Doing a PhD 
13
So Why Bother? 
13
Choosing the Topic (Or Does the Topic Choose You?) 
17
Key Points to Remember 
20
Suggested Reading and Resources
21
2
Formulating a Research Question 
22
Moving from the Initial Research Proposal Towards a Formulated
Research Question 
22
Gaining an Overview of the Literature and Research 
24
Common Issues in Research Question Formulation 
27
The Fit between Your Research Questions and Overall Design 
31
Key Points to Remember 
32
Suggested Reading
32
3
Choosing and Changing Supervisor 
33
Making the Right Choice 
33
What Type of Relationship Can I Expect?
36
When Your Supervisor Gets Another Job 
39
Reasons for Changing Supervisor 
40
Finding a New Mentor
42
Key Points to Remember 
43
Suggested Reading 
44
4
Managing the Ethics of Academia 
45
Why Bother with Ethics? 
45
Doing Ethical Research 
46
The Role of Research Ethics Committees 
53
Personal Ethics in Research Practice 
55
Key Points to Remember 
56
Suggested Reading 
57
5
What to Do with Your Data 
58
From Data to Findings 
58
Getting Started, Getting Stuck and Pushing Forward 
60
Preparing Data for Analysis 
62
Analytical Strategies 
65
Key Points to Remember 
69
Suggested Reading 
69
Part II
Writing, Publishing and Networking
71
6
Writing Up and Writer’s Block 
73
Writing as Activity, Process and Product 
73
It Is Never Too Early to Start Writing 
74
Managing the Writing Process 
76
Writing as an Aid to Argument Development 
76
Writing Up Your Thesis 
78
Writer’s Block and Strategies for Moving On 
81
Key Points to Remember 
82
Suggested Reading 
82
7
Papers and Publishing 
83
Why the Rush? 
83
Getting Your Work Out There 
86
The Publishing Process 
89
They Said What? Be Prepared for Challenging Comments 
90
Key Points to Remember 
93
Suggested Reading and Resources
94
8
Networking 
95
It’s Good to Talk: The Value of Networking
95
Anxious about Networking?
96
Networking Is about Giving as Much as Receiving
98
Taking a Proactive Approach
99
Getting Your PhD
vi
What Constraints Do I Face?
102
Key Points to Remember
103
Suggested Reading 
104
9
Missing the Deadline 
105
The Broader Picture: Submission Rates and Missing the Deadline 
105
A Lack of Guidance and Support 
106
Mismanaging the Research Process 
107
Personal Circumstances 
109
Dealing with Disappointment 
110
Enhancing the Chances of Meeting the Deadline 
110
Key Points to Remember 
113
Suggested Reading 
113
10
The Viva and Beyond 
115
You Have Submitted – Now what?
115
How to Prepare for the Viva 
117
Post Viva: Celebration, Commiseration and More Work! 
120
Thinking about ‘After’ Before It Arrives 
122
Key Points to Remember 
126
Suggested Reading and Resources
126
Part III
Shifting Identities and Institutions
127
11
Non-Traditional Routes into the PhD 
129
Starting a PhD Later in the Lifecourse 
129
Older Students – Returning to Study 
130
Applying Work Wisdom to the Challenge of Academia 
132
It’s Work, but Not as You Know It: Recognising the Differences 
134
Professional Doctorates 
137
Key Points to Remember 
138
Suggested Reading 
139
12
Undertaking a PhD Part-time 
140
Why Part-time Study? 
140
Taking the Plunge! 
141
Obvious Hurdles
143
A Different Timeframe 
145
Key Points to Remember 
149
Suggested Reading 
149
13
Combining Teaching and Doctoral Studies 
150
The Unsaid Assumption 
150
What Is Teaching? 
152
Contents
vii
So,What’s In It for Me? 
153
And the Catch Is? 
157
Effective Corner-cutting Strategies 
159
Key Points to Remember 
162
Suggested Reading
162
14
Reconciling the Research Role with
the Personal
163
Doctoral Research and the ‘Personal’
163
Emotions and Doing Research 
167
Managing Your Emotions
170
Key Points to Remember 
171
Suggested Reading 
171
Part IV
Relationships of Support
173
15
What to Expect from Your Supervisor
175
The Basics 
175
Types of Supervision 
176
Styles of Supervision 
178
Overall Expectations 
179
Managing Your Supervision 
182
Key Points to Remember
184
Suggested Reading 
184
16
Enabling Research Environments 
185
Challenging Exploitation and Enabling Student Development 
185
Research Students and Institutional Responsibilities 
186
Student Experiences and Institutional Practices 
188
Knowing Your Rights as a Research Student 
192
Key Points to Remember 
193
Suggested Reading and Resources
193
17
Combining Family Commitments with
Doctoral Studies
194
Balancing Multiple Roles and Responsibilities 
194
Incompatible Identities, Roles and Responsibilities? 
195
Complementary and Empowering Connections 
199
Institutional Support for Postgraduate Students with Children
199
Strategies for Success 
201
Key Points to Remember 
202
Suggested Reading and Resources
202
Getting Your PhD
viii
18
Coping with Stress with Eve Parsons
203
The Stresses and Strains of the Birth of a Thesis 
203
Sniffing Out Support 
204
The Role of the Counsellor 
205
The Wrath of the Supervisor 
208
Stages of Stress 
210
No Magic Wands but … 
211
Key Points to Remember
211
Suggested Reading and Resources 
212
Final Thoughts
213
References
216
Appendices
1 Example of an Informed Consent Form
219
2 Example of an Information Sheet 
220
Index
221
Contents
ix
Acknowledgements
This book would not have been possible without the twenty-seven contributors
who so willingly shared their experiences.We thank all of them for their thoughtful
reflection and commitment to the project. Harriet would like to thank those who
undertook the PhD journey with her, namely Ruth,Ali and Erica.Teela would like
to acknowledge the role of her current PhD students who have provided renewed
enthusiasm for passing on knowledge and building a research community. Thanks
must go to Patrick Brindle at Sage Publications for his faith in our ideas, his
thoroughness and his patience.
Contributors
Bill Armer undertook an ‘access’ course at the age of 42 in Scarborough, going on
to study at Leeds University for a BA in Social Policy. On graduating he took a ‘real
world’ job for a year before returning to Leeds to study for an MA in Disability
Studies, and subsequently embarked upon PhD research into the social policy impli-
cations of eugenic ideology during the twentieth century. He is the author of ‘In
Search of a Social Model of Disability: Marxism, normality and culture’ (which
appeared as a chapter in Barnes, C. and Mercer, G. (2004) Implementing the Social
Model of Disability: Theory and Research. Leeds:The Disability Press).
JK Tina Basi is among the first graduates from the PhD programme in Gender
Studies at the Centre for Interdisciplinary Gender Studies (CIGS), University of
Leeds. Her thesis, titled Globalization and Transnational Indian Call Centres:
Constructing Women’s Identities, is soon to be published. Born in Nottingham, raised
in Canada and having worked abroad and travelled extensively, her research interests
involve feminist theory, globalisation, race and ethnicity, diaspora studies, technology
and transnational subjectivities.As an Indian feminist and artist she has also produced
and performed in the premier UK charity production of the Vagina Monologues, and
written numerous short stories, screenplays, and stage plays. She currently works at
Intel Ireland in the Digital Health Group on a number of research projects includ-
ing the Global Ageing Experience, for which she is conducting ethnographic, qual-
itative research on elderly people around the world.
Ruth Bartlett is a lecturer in dementia studies at the University of Bradford. She is
co-ordinator for the BSc in Dementia Studies and Older People’s Health in Mind
Peer Educator Course, she also teaches on the MSc in Dementia Studies. She has a
professional background in mental health nursing, which involved working with
people with dementia in a wide range of clinical and social care settings. Ruth grad-
uated from Oxford Brookes University in 2004 with a PhD in sociology. Her doc-
torate explored meanings of social exclusion in relation to older people with
dementia in care homes. Current research interests include the civic participation of
people with dementia and cultural conceptions of citizenship.
Marta Bolognani holds a lectureship in Anthropology at the Lahore University of
Management Sciences, Pakistan.While being unemployed she was pursuing a career
as a professional Bollywood dancer, but academia won her over.At the moment she
is turning her doctoral research in the cultural aspects of crime and crime preven-
tion in the Pakistani community for Bradford into a book. She is the convenor of
the Pakistan Workshop in the Lake District. Her main interests are British Pakistanis’
identity, Muslims’ identity, transnationalism and anthropological research methods.
Jonny Burnett is currently finishing a PhD at the Centre for Criminal Justice
Studies, University of Leeds. His research interests include contemporary immigra-
tion and asylum policy,‘anti-terrorism’ policies, policing, and community cohesion.
He has written in a variety of publications – ‘academic’and otherwise – around these
concerns,including Race and Class, Journal for Crime, Conflict and the Media, Campaign
Against Racism and Fascism, and Red Pepper.
Joseph Burridge spent seven and a half years in the School of Sociology and Social
Policy at the University of Nottingham, first as a sociology undergraduate and then
as a postgraduate at both masters and PhD level. He wrote his masters thesis on the
then failed process of repealing Section 28,and then received an ESRC grant to fund
his PhD research into the ‘discursive difficulty’ observable in social conflicts, and in
the build-up to the invasion of Iraq in 2003 specifically. He is currently a Research
Associate on the Changing Families, Changing Food programme at the University of
Sheffield.
Harriet Churchill is a Lecturer in Social and Public Policy (University of
Manchester) and has also worked as a Research Fellow (University of Leeds) and an
Associate Lecturer (The Open University). Harriet’s research interests span research
methods,welfare reform,contemporary family lives and theories that explore relation-
ships between identity formation, agency and social structures. Harriet completed her
PhD on Lone Motherhood: Identity and Agency in Context in 2004 at Oxford Brookes
University and has publications on New Labour’s family policy, the development of
children’s services, lone mothers’ accounts of parenting and the PhD experience.
Sharon Elley is currently studying for her doctorate at the University of Leeds. She
is a part-time lecturer in sociology and has been a youth worker for six years. Her
research interests centre on young people’s issues, supporting them and acknowledg-
ing their views within society, particularly within formal and informal education.
Her PhD research focuses upon young people’s views of sex and relationship educa-
tion, sexuality and close, intimate relationships in general.
Sallyann Halliday is a Research Fellow at the Policy Research Institute, Leeds
Metropolitan University and a part-time PhD student in the School of Sociology
and Social Policy at the University of Leeds. Her main areas of research interest are
worklessness, social inclusion and the research process. Her work has recently
included being a member of the ‘Worklessness’ team as part of the national evalua-
tion of ‘New Deal for Communities’and lead researcher for the ‘Gorbals’in Glasgow
as part of the national evaluation of ‘Working Neighbourhood Pilots’. Her PhD
Getting Your PhD
xii
research is exploring the world of contract research, focusing on negotiated knowl-
edge production and occupational culture.
Richard Heslop is researching for a Doctorate in Education at the University of
Leeds and his main research interest lies in the areas of police training and police
culture.When he started his doctorate Richard was a part-time student and full-time
police officer,though he now realises that this relationship has become the other way
round! He has a BSc in social science from the Open University, an MA in politics
from the University of Leeds and a PGCE from Huddersfield.
Yousaf Ibrahim is a senior lecturer in Sociology at Trinity and All Saints College,
Leeds. He is currently completing his doctorate in the School of Sociology and
Social Policy at the University of Leeds. His research is focused on the international
protests against new-liberal globalisation and the conflicts between different organi-
sation and participants in the anti-capitalist movement.
Rebecca Mallett is a disabled researcher who has recently submitted her PhD the-
sis. Her research focuses around contemporary intersections between cultural theory
and disability studies. She is also the coordinator for the Postgraduate/Doctoral
Disability Research Forum (Centre of Applied Disability Studies, University of
Sheffield) which, in part, involves organising workshops on inclusive practices for
disability-related research.
Claire Maxwell is a research officer at the Thomas Coram Research Unit, Institute
of Education, University of London. Her area of expertise is young people’s experi-
ences of sexual and intimate relationships,with a specific focus on young women and
agency. Prior to receiving her PhD (2005) from the University of London, she stud-
ied for her MA, MSc and Diploma of Social Work at the University of Oxford.
Claire’s background has been in social work, youth policy development and teach-
ing on the Open University’s ‘Working with Young People’ course. Recent publica-
tions have appeared in Journal of Youth Studies and Journal of Adolescence.
Doug Morrison is studying for a doctorate at the Department of Law, University
of Leeds.The focus of his research concentrates on three core areas: bioethical issues
surrounding clinical and research practice and the impact of both professional
guidance and the law, all set against the background of events at both Alder Hey
Children’s Hospital and Bristol Royal Infirmary and the non-consensual retention
of organs and tissues.The impetus for these interests can be traced to both his pre-
vious career in the NHS, where he worked in a variety of clinical and research set-
tings, as well his completion of the LLB at the University of Leeds.
Eve Parsons is a UKCP registered psychotherapist working full time in the student
counselling service at Nottingham Trent University. She works with individuals and
groups, including support groups for postgraduate students.
Contributors
xiii
John Michael Roberts is a lecturer in sociology and communications at Brunel
University. He received his PhD in 2000 from Cardiff University. Research interests
can be seen in his publications, which include The Aesthetics of Free Speech (Palgrave,
2003),Realism, Philosophy and Social Science (co-authored,Palgrave,2006),After Habermas:
New Perspectives on the Public Sphere (co-edited, Blackwell, 2004), Realism, Discourse
and Deconstruction (co-edited, Routledge, 2004) and Critical Realism and Marxism (co-
edited, Routledge 2002). He is currently working on a new book that explores the
different forms of free speech in the global world today.
Christine Rogers is a Lecturer in Education in the School of Criminology,
Education, Sociology and Social Work at Keele University. She completed her PhD,
titled A Sociology of Parenting Children Identified with Special Educational Needs: The Private
and Public Spaces Parents Inhabit, at the University of Essex and then spent a year as an
ESRC postdoctoral research fellow in the Centre for Family Research, University of
Cambridge. Christine has published in Auto/Biography and British Journal of Sociology of
Education. She has also written (with Helen Lucey) on the power relationship between
the supervisor and research student in a book Power, Knowledge and the Academy:
Exploring the Institutional and Personal Dynamics of Feminist Research, commissioned by
Palgrave. Christine is now researching sexual identity and young adults with learning
impairments and not coincidently, has a teenage daughter with learning impairments.
Teela Sanders is a Senior Lecturer in Sociology of Crime and Deviance in the School
of Sociology and Social Policy,University of Leeds.Her current research interests are in
the areas of gender, regulating behaviours and deviance and she has conducted exten-
sive research in the sex industry. She has journal articles in, amongst others, Sociology,
British Journal of Sociology, Gender, Work and Organization, Urban Studies, and Feminist
Criminology. Teela has published the books Sex Work: A Risky Business (Willan, 2005)
and more recently Paying for Pleasure: Men Who Buy Sex (Willan, 2007).
Nicola Scott is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Government, International
Politics and Philosophy, University of Manchester. Her research looks at the interna-
tional political economy of North–South, ‘private–public’ partnerships to foster
capacity building in crop biotechnology within developing countries.
Sonali Shah has just completed a three-year postdoctorate at the University of
Nottingham, on a project funded by the European Social Fund:‘Future Selves: Career
Choices of Young Disabled People’.The study explores the choices of disabled young
people, and the structures and policies in the education system, through innovative
drama techniques,qualitative interviews with young people and relevant education pro-
fessionals. It also uses her experience as a young disabled researcher to develop under-
standing of the perspective of young disabled people, which is often ignored.
Melanie Shearn is currently a full-time PhD student at the University of Leeds.
Her research is on fathers, choice-making and work–life balance issues and policies,
Getting Your PhD
xiv
and is funded by the ESRC. She has worked in a variety of jobs in both the UK and
South Africa.
Martin Smith is currently employed as a Senior Intelligence Analyst by Bedfordshire
Police, where he analyses patterns and trends in local criminality, as well as profiling
offenders and crime problems. Prior to leaving academia, Martin was employed by
the University of Oxford for two years as a Research Officer in Demography at the
Department of Social Policy and Social Work. He studied for a PhD in Geography
at the University of Oxford from 1997–2001, looking at the life-chances and aspira-
tions of young people of Bangladeshi origin living in east London. This followed
completion of his first degree in Geography at Lancaster University, from where he
graduated in 1996.
David Smith completed a BA in European Studies from London Metropolitan
University in 1995. He has taught English in Germany, Moscow and Saudi
Arabia before returning to study at the University of Manchester. His PhD area is
Contemporary US Foreign Policy,specifically the construction of a new grand strategic
consensus in US foreign policy and national security strategy following September 11.
He has been awarded an AHRC award and March–June 2006 was a Kluge Scholar at
the Library of Congress,Washington, DC.
Emily Tanner is a Senior Researcher in the Quantitative Department of the
National Centre for Social Research (NatCen). Her recent research projects include
the National Adult Learning Survey, Study of Secondary School Admissions and the
evaluation of the Adult Learning Grant. She has a DPhil from the University of
Oxford (2005) where she investigated maternal employment, parenting and child-
care in the Department of Social Policy and Nuffield College. Prior to doctoral
study, Emily was a researcher at the Zigler Center for Child Development and Social
Policy at Yale University.
Becky Tipper is a PhD student at the University of Manchester. Her research
examines the relationships between children aged 7–11 and their pets – exploring
the meanings that children give to these relationships, and the ways they take shape
in children’s everyday lives. From 2004 to 2006 she worked as a researcher on the
ESRC-funded project ‘Children Creating Kinship’ at the University of Manchester.
Becky previously studied Psychology (MA, University of St Andrews, 1999) and
Social Research (MA, University of Leeds, 2003).
Justin Waring is a lecturer in medical sociology and health policy at the University
of Nottingham. His primary research interests are in the changing character of med-
ical professional work, culture and regulation.These interests have been developed
within the context of the UK ‘patient safety’ agenda where he has considered how
issues of error and risk are regulated, by both managers and medics, and interplay
with notions of professionalism. After completing studies at the Universities of
Contributors
xv
Getting Your PhD
xvi
Liverpool (1998) and Birmingham (1999), Justin undertook his PhD at the
University of Nottingham between 2000 and 2003, followed by post-doctoral
research at the University of Manchester.
Sheelah Flatman Watson is currently pursuing a PhD in Geography at NUI
Maynooth. Her current research explores the spatial analysis of access to primary
education for students with an intellectual and/or developmental disability, specifi-
cally the causal barriers to inclusion in mainstream and consequent outcomes of
exclusion. Social justice, citizenship, equality, community and choice are the key ele-
ments that guide this work.Areas of interest and involvement include a local ARCH
club, Special Olympics Network and local Autistic Children’s Support Groups.
Further areas of interest include behavioural psychology, learning styles, social and
emotional skills development, relationships empathy and development of inclusive
communities.
Kate Williams is a Research Fellow in the Centre for Criminal Justice Policy and
Research at UCE Birmingham,following her PhD in criminology at Keele University.
Kate’s research interests include community involvement in policing, vigilantism and
prostitution.Her work has recently appeared in the Howard Journal of Criminal Justice and
commissioned research into resettlement has just been published by Government Office
West Midlands. She is currently working on a joint-authored criminal justice textbook
and an edited collection, amongst other projects. Kate also sits on the British Society of
Criminology’s Ethics and Professional Affairs Committee, together with the Executive
Committee and Advisory Council.
Gina Wisker is Director of Learning and Teaching Development at Anglia Polytechnic
University where she also coordinates women’s studies and teaches English. Gina has
supervised PhD and masters students for many years and now also researches postgrad-
uate learning and supervisory practices and runs workshops on supervision and research
methods. This has led to her writing The Postgraduate Research Handbook (Palgrave
Macmillan, 2001) and The Good Supervisor (Palgrave Macmillan, 2005), along with a
range of essays.
Introduction
About this book
This book aims to provide a resource to help research students through the process of
accessing, undertaking and completing doctoral research in the social sciences and the
humanities.The book seeks to realise this objective via a focus on research students’
experiences,dilemmas,options and strategies in practice across a range of methodolog-
ical, personal and institutional aspects of the doctoral process.While we felt that in the
past few years there had been a welcomed burst of postgraduate and doctoral educa-
tional guides and detailed research methodology texts that debate the technical and
analytical aspects of particular approaches, we identified a need for a textbook aimed
at research students that does the following:
•
Provides accessible advice and guidance across a spectrum of methodological, personal,
emotional, practical and institutional issues suitable to an increasingly diverse student
body.
•
Provides an account of research as method, process and practice.
•
Uses real life experiences to demonstrate the process of thesis development.
While research inquiries are informed by rigorous theoretical and methodological
principles and plans, skill and craft progression is fundamentally developed via a
process of applying these to real life circumstances and dilemmas. Research as it is
practised remains under-reported for many reasons, and yet the novice seeking to
develop into a professional researcher can potentially gain much from access to this
level of practice and learning. For those embarking on independent academic
research probably for the first time, there is huge scope for anxiety and uncertainty
in seeking to apply the variety of theoretical, methodological and technical prescrip-
tions to their specific research encounters.We sought to recognise the role of learning
by doing within doctoral research by seeking to write a text that aimed to facilitate
making informed choices and engagement with a range of research experiences and
situations.We have included accounts from students to show how they managed the
doctoral process,made strategic choices and developed their skills,as a means of con-
tributing to the need to describe learning and research in practice.
The need for such a text was born from our concerns and considerations as
recently graduated PhD students in addition to discussions about research dilemmas
and support needs within broader peer and research methods networks. A brief
overview of these motivating factors will help to set out for the reader our basic
premises, the intended scope of the book and why the book is structured and written
the way it is.
A gap in support for PhD students?
In their preface, Rugg and Petre (2004: vii) write:
one of the most frequent laments of the postgraduate researcher is:‘Why didn’t someone
tell me that earlier?’ They refer to what they call the The Unwritten Rules of PhD
Research – rules, advice and guidance on a myriad of issues relating to the practice and
culture of academia which aid the doctoral student in their progress. They also highlight
that if key information is omitted from supervisory discussions or doctoral training this can
potentially contribute to ‘large amounts of confusion, depression, wasted effort and gen-
eral tears and misery’. (Rugg and Petre, 2004: vii)
In their text, Rugg and Petre (2004) consider university doctoral procedures, the
system of postgraduate education, networking, reading, writing, research design and
publishing.They seek to impart their tacit knowledge of how to do the craft of aca-
demic research (such as developing your reading, writing and research design skills)
as well as how to navigate and develop your academic career within university cultures
and relationships. Such a sentiment also spurred us to write this textbook and, like
Rugg and Petre, emerged from our own doctoral experience with critical concerns
about the process.
We had other motivations too.We also wanted to acknowledge the growing diver-
sity of the doctoral cohort and the need to recognise the connections between
research as method, approach and principles. We wanted to focus on research as
experienced and practised in specific ways by students engaged with real life situa-
tions, unexpected events and everyday institutional relationships. Our intention was
to break down what can be alienating beliefs – that there is one right way to do
research or one typical type of doctoral student and experience.There may well be
‘hidden rules’ that can help you progress but we felt recognition of students’ capac-
ities for applying their knowledge and awareness to the specific situations they faced
was also needed in order to enhance motivations and resources for completion and
researcher development.
The idea for this book emerged from our own experiences of grappling with under-
taking doctoral research studies and applying our research training and knowledge to
specific research problems.While we valued and utilised the range of theoretically and
methodologically focused textbooks (with a particular interest in pursuing qualitative
social science approaches), we felt that, first, there was a gap within the range of pub-
lished research and method textbooks that provided generic accounts of putting
research principles and plans into practice as a PhD student. We felt that beyond
methodological debates that specifically addressed reflexivity within the research
Getting Your PhD
2
process or the application of specific approaches based on an examination of research
as practice – there was little discussion of how research was actually conducted in real
life situations. The problem with debates on reflexivity in research methods texts
was that they were generally aimed at how to develop this particular methodology
rather than speaking to researchers in general across disciplinary or methodological
approaches.Yet we found that we valued, as did many of our peers, the sharing of our
research dilemmas, issues and strategic thinking.We also felt that sharing how we were
undertaking research in practice was a crucial aspect of relieving fears around ‘doing
things right’ or overcoming isolation and worry within the doctoral process.
Secondly, we felt that the current range of textbooks and systems of support
within universities (such as within supervisory teams and student support networks)
often sustained a bounded notion of the researcher as devoid of other competing or
personal commitments,concerns and demands.We concluded that despite the plethora
of ‘how to’ manuals, there were few texts that really expressed the complexity of
research experiences and the connections between your role as a researcher and your
wider university and non-university life experiences.We felt that there needed to be
more recognition that the PhD experience was more than theoretical and method-
ological considerations – it was an experience that sat alongside another big experi-
ence – life! Doing a PhD in the twenty-first century rarely follows the trajectory of
undergraduate, masters and research degree without life interfering somewhere
along the line. People do PhDs at all stages of life, with a whole manner of other
commitments, burdens and work expectations that have to be managed.The PhD is
increasingly difficult to fund, and if academia is the long-term career goal, then get-
ting an academic post cannot be thought about when the viva is over. Further, the
everyday nitty-gritty of doing doctoral research involves enhancing a rigorous social
science approach while also contending with and managing multiple demands and
responses both institutionally and personally.
We felt these two aspects of the PhD experience required more generic recog-
nition. We hope to have brought together the process of learning to become an
independent researcher through the application of method, principles and frame-
works;and the embedded nature of research practice with other aspects of life expe-
riences.We wanted to discuss an array of issues that research students negotiate, such
as childcare, finance, emotional roller-coasters, personal challenges and personality
clashes alongside a grounded discussion of the trials, tribulations and complexities of
getting through designing, doing and writing a PhD.We hope overall to offer sup-
port to doctoral students by providing descriptions of research in practice and a
holistic view of the student experience – contributing to calls to demystify research
and doctorates. Such a text can help the doctoral student exactly because as a novice
researcher, confidence can be boosted through awareness that research in practice is
a messy and diverse endeavour. Becoming a professional researcher involves engag-
ing with this messiness and applying an approach that enhances research practice to
maximise the possibilities presented. Doing a PhD is all about learning through doing, a
process that can be enhanced by engaging with individual motivations,aspirations and
specific research problems whilst utilising the available resources and opportunities at
Introduction
3
hand. It will probably mean making mistakes and being presented with unexpected
outcomes and obstacles – requiring reflection and a perseverance to try something
else or just try again! Learning, however, may be limited if research is thought of
merely as the implementation of techniques leading students to fear if they are ‘doing
the right thing’ or a ‘good enough job’.These concerns need to be turned into a
consideration of upholding research standards and rigour while expanding your skills
and applications towards the numerous research dilemmas that can arise in practice.
To produce such a text we sought the input of a range of contributors – research stu-
dents who themselves were in the throes of beginning or completing their doctorates.
We wanted contributions from people at all stages of the PhD, a mix of those who had
entered the process through traditional and non-traditional routes as well as at different
stages of their own lifecourse.We wanted a good mix of disciplines from the social sci-
ences and humanities that promoted a range of generic experiences across the subjects.
The case study approach was decided as the most appropriate methodology because we
wanted to show a range and variety of experiences, painting a realistic picture of the
dilemmas and issues.We think we have done this because the contributions report on
both mainstream and marginal perspectives. Some people who contributed were really
struggling when they wrote their reflections;others had decided not to pursue the final
stages of the PhD, whilst a few were starting new careers in academia and business
after completing the process. Recruitment was through our own academic networks,
advertisements on postgraduate networks and forums within our own university
settings and beyond in the UK, inviting contributors to reflect on aspects of their
experiences and research practices as students.We have also contributed to this process
ourselves, drawing on our own PhD experiences.
Enhancing doctoral success: the changing shape of the
PhD in the UK context
It is no coincidence that this book has emerged during a phase of reform and
re-orientation within the UK doctoral system.The book,and its aims described above,
indicates a growing concern with enhancing the doctoral experience, improving
research practice and rates of completion. More people are undertaking doctoral
research than ever before.The Higher Education Statistics Agency (2005) tells us that
in 2004/05, 12,030 full time doctorate qualifications were awarded and a further
3,745 part time doctorates.These statistics represent a significant increase in people
studying for doctorates in the UK.Ten years previous, in 1994/95 only 1,385 doc-
torates were awarded. This rise in student numbers has occurred alongside many
changes and concerns surrounding doctoral education in the UK. Hockey’s (1994)
description of a PhD as a time of ‘intellectual solitariness, individualistic and self
autonomous’ still holds true to some extent, but there have also been many changes
that have altered the expectations, status and activities of PhD students. Doctoral
students in the social sciences and humanities are increasingly contributing to under-
graduate teaching, undertaking career development planning and are encouraged to
Getting Your PhD
4
develop a generic set of research skills.They are subject to new university procedures
for on-going monitoring and target deadlines to meet completion projections
(Harland and Plangger, 2004). Further, the idea of the ‘typical’ research student is
becoming increasingly misleading,with many doctorates funded by external agencies,
or as noted above, taken on a part-time basis.
Wider changes within and beyond Higher Education are driving developments in
the PhD world.While there has been concern about standards of supervision and
training within universities, there is also a debate about the role of undergraduate and
postgraduate education in relation to the wider labour market and economic context.
Universities have been under much pressure to re-organise and standardise doctoral
education and supervision. At the same time the very purpose of a doctorate has
become the subject of much debate.
Since the 1980s there has been concern at the length of time that students were tak-
ing to complete, as eight years was not uncommon, particularly in the social sciences
and humanities.Sir Gareth Roberts was commissioned to carry out a review in the late
1990s in recognition of low submission rates (the Economic and Social Research
Council (ESRC) submission rate was only 73% in 1994).These unacceptable levels of
inefficiency were the target of radical changes, including:
•
A four-year completion deadline.
•
A managerial style of managing Higher Education.
•
A need to establish a philosophy of apprenticeship for research rather than producing
knowledge.
•
Improvements and formalisation of training, supervision and guidance.
•
Improvements of the ‘throughput’ of students, particularly from overseas.
The Roberts Review, entitled ‘SET for Success’ (2002), set out these plans and a
vision for doctoral reform. Alongside the concern with non-completion and late
submission, there were broader anxieties about the fit between the skills needed in
the labour market and the quality of postgraduate students.There was concern that
universities were not producing postgraduates with the necessary and adequate skills
for a demanding twenty-first century international labour force.The PhD that was
timeless, with no criteria for how long the exercise should take, was also a concern
because it meant that students were out of the market place for longer and that their
salaries were held down.This led to an overhaul in the training that postgraduates
are given and a formalisation of the need for specific research methods training as
part of the PhD package. The Roberts Review (2002) emphasised the need for
universities to impart transferable skills to postgraduates who could then enter
the labour market with a range of skills suitable for a variety of industries, not just
academia.
Pre-empting the outcome of the Roberts Review, the four UK research funding
councils produced a ‘Joint Statement of UK Research Councils’ (2001),which set
out what is meant by training and transferable skills and includes the following
categories:
Introduction
5
•
Research skills and techniques.
•
Research environment.
•
Research management.
•
Personal effectiveness.
•
Communication skills.
•
Networking and team-working.
•
Career management.
The ESRC introduced what is known as the 1+3 funding studentships which
designated one year for formal training and an expectation that the PhD will be
completed within the following three years.This is now recognised as the formal
and common format for PhDs with a strong expectation that they are completed
within the four-year period. Coupled with these changes, the Research
Assessment Exercise and Quality Assurance Agency has also contributed to a reg-
ulated system of monitoring outputs, research activity and building research
capacities.
These changes in the management and understanding of what a PhD is, have
been met with criticisms that convey the continuation of diverse conceptions of
the role and purpose of doctoral research. Leonard (2001: 23) suggests there are
concerns with the approach of engineering doctoral studies in the following
ways:
•
Education at this higher level becomes no longer considered a welfare right or a path
of self-development but part of the needs of industry and the employment market.
•
The role of education to create a common culture or contribute to knowledge itself is
undermined.
•
The focus on training researchers through doctoral programmes reduces the aim of
making a significant contribution to knowledge.
Despite these concerns though, the changes have contributed to new benchmarks
for doctoral training and student development. Any student entering postgraduate
study will realise they are being trained as a researcher as there is a heavy emphasis
on learning research design, and qualitative and quantitative methods. There is
improved supervision, both in terms of quality and accountability, as well as an
emphasis on monitoring progress and tracking individuals through the system so
they don’t ‘get lost’.An improvement in the Higher Education system as a whole is
that of complaints procedures and Equal Opportunities mechanisms in an attempt
to counterbalance the traditional prejudices that have long been associated with
universities.
This text aims to recognise and further support agendas for widening participa-
tion, student development and doctoral completion via guidance covering a range of
issues and experiences.The chapters set out below encourage students to think about
their research problems, principles, objectives and resources and develop awareness
suitable for a professional approach to research.
Getting Your PhD
6
Personal development planning
We want to place this book in the wider context of Personal Development
Planning (PDP hereafter), which is becoming an important aspect of Higher
Education at both undergraduate and postgraduate levels.The Roberts Review ‘Set
for Success’ urged funding councils to make sure that PhD programmes included a
minimum of two weeks’ dedicated training each year, based on developing research
and transferable skills.To meet wider objectives of improving the standards of grad-
uates with skills reaching beyond that of their expert subject, the PDP system was
introduced in universities that took a keen interest in personal development.
In brief, the PDP is a process of structured activities and support whereby indi-
viduals reflect upon their learning, achievements and personal, education and career
development (UK Grad Programme, 2004: 2–3). The process is often developed
throughout the PhD but is kick-started in the first year. The types of activities
include reviewing training needs; personal reflection and review; skills assessment;
planning training; research log; collecting CV information and research planning.
The benefits to those students who engage in the PDP process (currently it is largely
voluntary) can include providing:
•
A structured framework to reflect on personal and professional development.
•
Empowerment for students to take control of their learning.
•
Reflection on career management.
•
Enhancement of the student progress monitoring process.
•
Enhancement of project management, time management and goal setting skills.
The PDP process can effectively focus on employability, enabling students to:
•
Record, reflect on and plan their own development.
•
Highlight transferable skills.
•
Make suitable career plans.
•
Demonstrate employability.
Many of the chapters are written in the spirit of encouraging students to monitor
their own development, plan for their success and troubleshoot where problems arise.
We would encourage students to think about engaging with the PDP process in order
to have structured time during the PhD to think constructively about their personal
development alongside their intellectual abilities.
What this book does and does not do
This book seeks to:
•
Provide strategies for thinking through common problems experienced by social sci-
ence and humanities research students.
Introduction
7
•
Demystify the reality of doing a PhD via the use of real life student case studies of lived
experiences.
•
Balance a concern with rigorous research standards, student support and sustaining
student well-being with a research–life balance.
•
Contextualise research as involving practices, emotions, relationships and personal
investments.
•
Look beyond methodological and university agendas.
•
Seek to address a broad range of issues for a broad student body.
The book aims to contribute to the wide-ranging literature on research methods
and study strategies already available to research students.We believe there are many
texts providing the following guidance and hence this book does not cover:
•
In-depth guidance on particular methodological or design issues.
•
Guidance on seeking doctoral funding.
Overview of chapters
The book is organised into four parts, the first two of which cover particular aspects
of the research process while the second two focus more on the multiple roles of the
doctoral student:
•
Negotiating the research process.
•
Writing, publishing and networking.
•
Shifting identities and institutions.
•
Relationships of support.
Part I discusses crucial aspects of beginning, designing and doing PhD research.
The first chapter considers student motivations for doing doctoral research and illus-
trates not only the multiple routes into, and motivations for beginning a PhD, but
also the role that our motivations play in the research process. Chapter 2 provides
advice and case study accounts of moving from your initial research proposal towards
a formulated, coherent and do-able research question. Chapters 3 and 4 consider
experiences and options for establishing your supervisory team and engaging with
ethical regulations for academic research.The final chapter in this part contemplates
practices and strategies for data analysis.
Part II turns towards a focus on writing, networking and publishing. Chapter 6
specifically addresses aspects of writing as part of your thesis development and the
process of writing up. Chapter 7 invites you to take your writing further, providing
advice, case studies and encouragement in the publishing process. Chapter 8 takes a
look at networking and the vital role that research relationships can play in the
development of your ideas, career and skills.
Getting Your PhD
8
The chapters written for Part III emphasise the connections between wider life
experiences and research endeavours. Chapter 11 reviews some less traditional routes
into PhD research and the challenges such routes can entail for both students and insti-
tutional change. One key aspect of change has been the increase in part-time doctor-
ate programmes, which is further discussed in Chapter 12.Teaching has also become a
central activity undertaken by doctoral students.Chapter 13 provides examples of how
some students sought to extend their teaching skills and provides guidance on seeking
adequate support and training alongside your research. Chapter 14 focuses on a major
theme of the book, that of how research is intimately connected to emotional
responses and orientations. Part IV reviews relationships of support. Chapter 15 exam-
ines the supervisory relationship and suggests a benchmark of what a student should
receive in terms of supervision. Chapter 16 looks at the research and university envi-
ronment in terms of its capacity to promote and inhibit the research process. Chapter
17 examines an increasing reality that many students who take a PhD are also parents and
carers and must manage family commitments.Chapter 18 concludes the case studies by
using the direct experiences of a university counsellor to highlight the role of
counselling in the university context.
Introduction
9
Part I
Negotiating the Research
Process
The first part of the book introduces some of the questions that arise at the very
early stages of thinking about doing a PhD and the steps necessary to find out
about courses, institutions and supervisors. This section really is about ‘negotiation’
as this is at the heart of the induction phase into the PhD process and returning to
education, which can be a daunting experience for many. In Chapter 1 we discuss
some of the motivations that drive people to take on this task of producing an orig-
inal piece of work in three years working full-time or six years part-time! Here we
explore a range of motivations for doing the PhD and encourage you to choose a
topic that will keep you fired up for the whole time. We hope this will clarify some
of your own initial thoughts and also make you realise that the decision to do a PhD
needs time as it is a significant life commitment. Chapter 2 deals with a question
that has confused many students, including the authors, and is something that our
own PhD students continually struggle with. It is not a simple process to pin your
wide and general interests about a topic down to a research question that is focused
and yet feasible. In this chapter we provide some broader understanding about the
process of question formulation and offer some techniques for reducing down your
ideas into a technical inquiry.
Chapter 3 is the first of two chapters that examines the relationship between the
doctoral student and their supervisor (also see Chapter 15). Undoubtedly one of the
most important aspects of conducting a PhD and yet sometimes the most anxious,
we think about how you are allocated (or perhaps choose) an academic to super-
vise your work. Unpicking the many facets of the relationship, we acknowledge
that changes in supervisors are sometimes inevitable and offer some solutions as to
how to manage what can be an unsettling time. No doubt from undergraduate
courses you will be aware that research is not conducted in a bubble, but that ethics
is intrinsic to the research process. As postgraduates you need to take ethical issues
within empirical research seriously, as your own research design will be scrutinised
to assess whether it is ethical. In Chapter 4 contributors explain how ethics have
affected their research, resulting in complex decisions, personal reflection and in
some cases richer findings. At the heart of this chapter we explain more about the
process of ethical governance which will affect students as they design and carry
out research in the field. 
The final chapter in Part I looks a little further into the doctoral process by asking
‘What to do with your data?’ Often students are so proficient at data collection and
they amass so much information that they have problems making sense of it. This
chapter provides techniques and suggestions for managing both qualitative and
quantitative data, from preparing the data, familiarisation, coding and reading the
findings. This is often a neglected stage in the data collection phase that is given
little credence when students begin the doctorate. We hope we can get you to
think about data analysis at an early stage as it is as important as formulating a
question. 
Negotiating the Research Process
12
Chapter 1
Motivations for Doing a PhD
What this Chapter Includes:

The main motivations for doing a PhD

Discussion of how topics are chosen

A PhD as career development

The personal agenda

Tips on key questions to ask before applying
From our perusal of other ‘how to’guides written for PhD students we have noted that
not many pay attention to the initial motivations for doing a PhD.The reasons behind
and pathways to considering and taking on board this endeavour are ultimately what
will get you through the difficult patches. Here we explore some of the varied reasons
why a PhD becomes a likely option and how subject topics are chosen.We asked the
contributors to this book the following questions, which we urge you to ask yourself:
•
What were your motivations for doing a PhD?
•
How and why did you choose your topic?
We hope that you will take time to reflect on these questions and explore your own
motivations for taking on a significant commitment that will put you in the privi-
leged category of approximately 2% of the population who have achieved the highest
qualification in the British education system.
So why bother?
Our contributors have provided us with the evidence to suggest there are five core
reasons that motivate a PhD: career development; lack of job satisfaction; research as
active engagement in politics; a personal agenda; and (sometimes) drifting into the
challenge.These different motivating factors will be described through the narratives
of the contributors.
Career development
One of the central motivating factors in taking on a PhD is to enhance career
progression and development in existing and new occupations. Career development
can be enhanced in several ways. For instance, you can already be in a job and con-
sider this higher qualification as the route to quicker promotion, or specialisation. Or
you could have reached a natural point in your career where progression to the next
level would be smoother with a higher qualification.Sallyann Halliday describes how
her desire to develop more critical skills through a concentrated period of research
was identified as beneficial to her day job as a contract researcher:
I felt that I had hit a ‘turning point’ in the work I was currently involved in as a
contract researcher. For me, the motivation for doing a PhD was about being able
to explore a topic I was really interested in through in-depth study, to widen my
knowledge and develop different skills. I wanted to gain skills in critical thought and
writing. Doing a PhD was the path I felt I should take and more importantly one I
felt that I needed to go down to develop and progress further in my career (or
possibly lead to a change in career focus). I saw it as a form of both personal and
professional development.
For others, the desire to ‘be an academic’ meant that the PhD was an inevitable
step into becoming a lecturer. Joseph Burridge speaks of how his desire to work
in the university setting was the motivation for continually pursuing funding for
a PhD:
From the age of about fifteen I was sure that I wanted to pursue a career in acad-
emia, largely because of my love of reading and learning. A PhD was always
going to be on the agenda, since it is no longer realistic to hope to begin such a
career without one. I attempted to get funding immediately after finishing my first
degree, but was unsuccessful and had to self-fund a masters degree as a means
to demonstrate my seriousness for the next round of funding competitions.
Fortunately it seemed to work and I was successful the second time around!
Self-funding a one-year postgraduate course is a popular method of finding out
whether further study is the right route. Although this is a financial cost, part-time
study is always an option before making a big life change by fully committing to a
PhD. However, it is not always the case that a PhD ‘was on the cards’ in a person’s
Negotiating the Research Process
14
life pathway. Sometimes wider dissatisfaction or a desire for another challenge can
prompt enrolment onto a PhD programme.
Lack of job satisfaction
While taking on board a PhD can be born out of developing a career path,at the same
time a lack of job satisfaction in current employment can be a motivating factor to seek
an alternative enterprise. Melanie Shearn describes how dissatisfaction in her employ-
ment, coupled with some wider life goals, naturally led her to consider a PhD:
I had worked in a number of different jobs in related industries and found that I
lacked job satisfaction. I wanted to do something that made, in my view, a contri-
bution to society. But so did other people and competition for these jobs was fierce.
It seemed to me that the only way to make up for a lack of particular life experi-
ences was to have substantive knowledge and expertise of a topic area. I also
really enjoyed querying things and providing answers or direction. I thought that a
PhD could combine my substantive interests with research skills.
BOX 1.1
Don’t enter into a PhD lightly
Make sure you understand the commitment, and try to determine whether you need the PhD
to fulfil your career objectives. Also, be honest with yourself – are you really interested in the
subject? Do you really have a burning curiosity to find out the answers to your questions?
[Martin Smith]
Personal agenda
Often it is personal motivations that inspire people to investigate a specific topic or
gives them the desire to take on the job of giving voice to marginalised groups, or
in some way they want to set the record straight against tides of stereotypes and mis-
information that can spuriously inform our understanding of the world. Personal
insights or close contact with certain groups,lifestyles or experiences are familiar rea-
sons for pursuing further studies in the social sciences and humanities. Below, Sonali
Shah reflects on how her own experiences as an Asian woman living with a physical
impairment led her to study for a PhD:
Motivations for Doing a PhD
15
I applied for a journalism course, passed the entrance exam and was also given a
bursary. However, I was not given a place because the employers thought that my
disability would prevent me from achieving and coping with the work required. This
was seen as a significant turning point in my future professional orientation. It was
this and previous experiences of disability discrimination, coupled with the Asian
achievement-oriented culture within which I was brought up, that influenced my deci-
sion to pursue academic research to investigate what makes a disabled high-flyer.
No doubt you will meet people with interesting personal connections to their PhD
topic and fieldwork site. This can often be an inspirational motivation to take the
PhD forward and manage those difficult barriers to getting the job done.
Research as politics 
Closely tied to personal experiences, political principles and everyday politics that
influence policy and shape our lives, as well as world events, can also be triggers for
pursuing further studies. Joseph Burridge describes how his wider interest in political
controversies shaped his motivations and ideas for a PhD:
I had always been interested in controversy and argumentation since it seems to
me that they are fairly fundamental to the way in which we relate to one another as
human beings socially and politically. I had planned to undertake a more extensive
and detailed analysis of the political debate over the repeal of Section 28 – a piece
of legislation which has now been repealed but is usually described as having
banned the ‘promotion of homosexuality’ – which had been the topic of my masters
thesis. However, as I was finishing the thesis, the events of 11th September 2001
took place, and the aftermath seemed to be a location in which I could pursue some
similar themes to those that had interested me about Section 28.
PhDs are not isolated events that exist between the individual, the supervisor and the
research subjects.Real life events,political change and the localised and globalised set-
ting of the topic have bearing on motivations as well as the trajectory of the content of
the research.
Drifting In
The final factor is not as consciously driven as some of the above reasons for pursuing PhD
study. Several contributors described how they drifted into a PhD after undergraduate
Negotiating the Research Process
16
or postgraduate studies. This notion of drift is not necessarily something we would
discourage, as, after all, none of us knows what opportunities are around the corner and
we cannot all have clearly thought-out plans from the start.Yet we would add a caution-
ary tale to those scenarios that lead to individuals drifting into a PhD without giving very
careful consideration to the entity that is being taken on.Martin Smith spent several years
working towards his doctorate but in the end discontinued his studies as the need to earn
cash took over. Martin remarks below on the dangers of drift:
I somewhat drifted into doing a PhD, in a subject area that was of interest to me, but
was not my academic passion. I was unprepared for the challenge and commitment
I needed to make in the years to come, and feel now that I should have taken a
masters course to see whether higher level research and study was for me.
The reality is that personal circumstances are a clear indicator as to whether a PhD
is viable in terms of a drop in earnings, the prospects of the market place after com-
pletion and the opportunities that are available. Bill Armer, an older student who
returned to education late, describes how his options after his undergraduate degree
were fairly limited, and hence the ‘drift’ into further study:
As a late returner to education, I had no clear motivation when I first undertook my
BA degree. Finding myself unemployed and potentially unemployable, I really
drifted into academia as an honourable alternative to the dole.
Ultimately the motivations for undertaking a PhD span the spectrum of the per-
sonal and the political, motivated by the subject or a specific project, influenced by
a role model or attracted by the department, institution or even the student lifestyle!
Often, career plans are somewhere in the complexities of motivations as students
wrestle with the question ‘Where will having a PhD get me?’
Choosing the topic (or does the topic choose you?)
An intriguing aspect of doing a PhD is the plethora of topics that people choose.
One of the attractive aspects of doctoral studies is the freedom of topic and area of
study, as long as the end product fulfils the criteria of originality and a contribution
to knowledge. Critics suggest a change is taking place in the types of PhDs that are
funded as topics are influenced by the interests of research councils, who determine
Motivations for Doing a PhD
17
which areas should receive priority funding. How people select their research topics
could take the length of this book alone, as there are a myriad of reasons that involve
the personal and the political as well as the rather ordinary and mundane.
Strategies of deduction
The desire to do a PhD can sometimes precede the topic of interest. It is not always
the case that the topic of interest is the driving force behind wanting to study for at
least three years.There can be other strategies of deduction that provide a clear direc-
tion in terms of discipline and topic. Melanie Shearn decided that a PhD was what
she wanted to do before the topic was obvious:
I drew up lists of all the things I was passionate about in the world, as well as some
of the things I wanted to do in my life. I merged these and came up with a topic on
which I based a research funding proposal.
Similarly, it can be the case that you are clear about the general area in which you
want to study, but are not quite sure about the actual topic or how to develop a suc-
cinct research idea and set of questions. Often this entanglement can be ironed out
with some ‘thinking’ sessions with your supervisor. Before starting the PhD, Sharon
Elley had worked as a youth worker and was particularly interested in exploring young
people’s experiences of relationships but was not quite sure which angle to take.
Finding a gap in the literature was a key factor. Finally, having some contact with pro-
fessionals that designed and implemented the sex education programme,it was decided
that this is where the gap in knowledge lay and a feasible study was designed.
Job interest
Just as a desire for career progression or career change can motivate a PhD,developments,
knowledge and areas of interest you are exposed to in the work setting can be the inspi-
rational factor for your choice of topic.Richard Heslop had been a policeman for twenty
years before deciding to turn a work-based topic into a research question:
My original plan was to apply to research for a PhD in the field of politics and
policing. However, around that time my career took a change of direction and I was
posted into the Force Training Department. Working as a trainer was perhaps the
most rewarding role I had ever had in the police service and it sparked a strong
academic interest in adult education.
Negotiating the Research Process
18
The change in Richard’s day job (police work) was significant as it meant that instead
of a traditional PhD, a professional doctorate in education (Ed.D) was more appropri-
ate.Relationships with employers and the work-base settings are increasingly important
if studying for a PhD part-time whilst still working.You may be directly relating your
PhD questions to the work setting,using contacts at work as gatekeepers or work-based
resources to access key informants and respondents.
Politics and passion
Invariably you will find that people who are studying or have achieved a PhD are
passionate about their topic. If they are not when they start out, they often become
emphatic defenders of their territory by the end, after living, sleeping and breathing
the stuff for three years (or more!). Passion for a topic and the politics that often sur-
round the topic,are strong motivating forces for embarking on knowledge production.
Teela Sanders chose to study the female sex industry after directly working with sex
workers as a welfare professional and experiencing disillusionment with an academic
literature that did not appear to reflect the reality of some aspects of the sex indus-
try. JK Tina Basi demonstrates below how her own personal history was related to
her desire to pursue a certain line of inquiry about a specific group of people:
My motivation to do the PhD was born out of a desire to produce more knowledge
about Indian women. I was tired of always being told how Indian girls should be
and the things that they should not be doing. I wanted to find out for myself what
women in India were up to. However, I knew that to make it credible I couldn’t just
‘hang out’ in India; I had to tie my curiosity in with an ongoing dialogue. Thus a
feminist research project on Indian women’s identities was born.
Our passion for the topics we choose is not always clear cut from the start but is
vaguely in the background of a number of activities we undertake. It can be at the
point of thinking about a significant piece of work such as a PhD that these ideas
can become solidified. Bill Armer, who had skirted around the topic of disability
and eugenics for several years, describes this natural process of arriving at a topic:
At the heart of my PhD research topic was the interplay between eugenics and
genetics, which was sheer self-indulgence. Since childhood in the 1950s, when the
topic was fresh in the societal memory, I have been both repelled and fascinated by
the horrors of Nazi Germany. I have, it seems forever, been vaguely aware of the
dangers of eugenics. I never intended to develop an academic interest here, but
looking back it was almost inevitable that I would.
Motivations for Doing a PhD
19
There are often underlining reasons, whether personal, political or a combination of
both, that usually motivate people to want to know more.While this is not some-
thing that can be measured in an interview,or can be assessed through a research pro-
posal, the desire to want to study this very narrow and specialised area for at least
three years has to be something you are very clear about. Martin Smith ended up
with a research topic that he was only mildly interested in, and he recounts below
how this was not enough to keep him motivated when faced with dilemmas:
My choice of topic was not founded on having a deep interest in any particular topic,
which in hindsight I see as a mistake. At the end of the day, the drive to complete the
PhD has to come from oneself. It’s hard to work in the library until late at night on a
topic you don’t really enjoy when there’s always the alternative of the College bar.
Potentially the trickiest part of the PhD is taking the plunge and saying ‘yes’ this is
something I want to do and feel passionate enough about to make significant sacri-
fices. PhDs do mean making changes in your personal, social and work life and
therefore those initial decisions should be carefully considered.
BOX 1.2
Are you passionate about your subject?
Ask yourself:
•
Does your interest in the area relate closely to your personal experiences, political
viewpoint or professional concerns? 
•
Do you hold opinions or motives that shape how you are looking at the issue in a
particular way? 
•
What are the implications for your research questions? 
•
Do your interests and experiences lead you to ask specific questions? 
•
What alternative questions can be asked?
Key Points to Remember

There are no correct reasons for doing a PhD but think carefully about ‘why’.

If career development is the main motivation, assess what the PhD will give you.

Personal or political motivations are common but these must be balanced by
genuine academic interest.

Passion for your subject is an important ingredient for success and stamina – make
sure you have this at the start.
Negotiating the Research Process
20
SUGGESTED READING AND RESOURCES
Bentley, P.J. (2006) The PhD Application Handbook. Maidenhead: Open
University Press.
Etherington, K. (2004) Becoming a Reflexive Researcher: Using Ourselves in
Research. London: Jessica Kingsley.
Gordon, A.V. (2005) MBA Admissions Strategy: From Profile Building to
Essay Writing. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Walliman, N.S.R. (2005) Your Research Project: A Step-by-Step Guide for the
First Time Researcher. London: Sage.
Wilkinson, D. (2005) The Essential Guide to Postgraduate Study. London:
Sage.
National Postgraduate Committee—www.npc.org.uk
UK Grad programme—www.grad.ac.uk
Motivations for Doing a PhD
21
Chapter 2
Formulating a Research Question
What this Chapter Includes:

Moving towards a formulated research question

Distinguishing between research title, research area, general and focal
research questions

Gaining an overview of the literature

Generating a research question from a period of data collection

Thinking quantitatively

Common issues in research question formulation

Thinking about feasibility

The fit between your research questions and overall design
Moving from the initial research proposal towards a
formulated research question
Chapter 1 considered a variety of routes into, and motivations for, doctoral research.
Another difference at the outset of your research can be the degree of autonomy
you have in devising your focal research questions and the degree of prior research
undertaken in your doctoral research area.You may have become familiar with, and
deeply interested in, your research area over many years of undergraduate and post-
graduate education, gaining funding from a research council.Alternatively, you may
be undertaking a PhD as part of a wider research project. Here, you may have less
autonomy in devising your focal research questions and be accountable to an exter-
nal funder as well as your university.You may also be undertaking doctoral research
that involves venturing into new research areas compared with your previous aca-
demic interests. However, across this spectrum of circumstances, the beginning of
your doctoral research is likely to involve a period of immersion and focusing as
you move from a research title and general proposal to a set of formulated, coher-
ent and do-able research questions. Even within studies that have been commis-
sioned by outside agencies or designed prior to your involvement, it is likely you
will need to spend time understanding the wider context of your team project and
refining your focal PhD research questions. This period has been described as a
period of ‘reducing uncertainty’ (Phillips and Pugh, 2005), ‘progressive focusing’
(Arksey and Knight, 1999) and ‘generating an appropriate and coherent research
problem’ (Punch, 2000). This initial stage combines excitement when beginning
your project, uncertainty in getting to know a new area or taking your knowledge
to a more critical level as well as learning the skills and process of ‘research problem
formulation’. Focusing towards a coherent and do-able research problem that con-
tributes to the building of knowledge in your area is a challenging task. John
Roberts was interested in the general topic of ‘free speech in public spaces’ but
found the task of focusing his research ‘one of the most daunting tasks he faced’
during his PhD research.We hope you can retain your enthusiasm and interest in
your research topic while persevering and selectively focusing down your study
appropriately for doctoral research.
The need to focus your research and generate a coherent research problem can-
not be stressed enough. Central research questions, hypothesis or problems give your
research activities purpose and direction, linking your research to an ongoing debate
and/or body of knowledge.Without an explicitly formulated and worked through
purpose or focus (or at least a preliminary one) your research project is likely to get
steered in all sorts of directions.Without a formulated and feasible set of questions
you risk:
•
Feeling overwhelmed by your research.
•
Feeling uncertain about the value of your research.
•
Feeling unclear about what you are doing and where you are heading.
•
Duplicating previous research.
•
Asking common sense questions.
•
Feeling uncertain about the wider academic significance or placing of your research.
•
Generating data that is too general or vague and therefore difficult to draw conclusions
from.
Research questions do not often appear in a sudden brain-wave! Rather, they are
generated through a process of engaging with your research topic or interests (which
may of course lead to some brain-wave ideas).This engagement can involve analysing
and thinking about previous work in your area or undertaking a period of initial data
collection.The former approach involves deductively generating research questions
as you are deducing some focal questions from thinking about existing empirical and
theoretical developments in your research area and identifying the gaps, ambiguities
and inconsistencies within previous work.The latter approach involves inductively
generating research questions from a period of data collection – looking afresh at a
research topic or social phenomena. Many studies in practice involve a mixture of
deductive and inductive approaches (see Blaikie,2000).Research questions are there-
fore ‘formulated’ through an ongoing process of engagement with your research
interests, setting and/or prior research.
Formulating a Research Question
23
Distinguishing between research title, research area, general
and focal research questions
What is a ‘formulated’ research question? Drawing on her own research and
supervisory background, Gina Wisker advises students to distinguish between the
research title, focal area and key research questions (also see Phillips and Pugh,
2005; Punch, 2000). Problems arise if students persist in thinking that their doc-
toral research title and general research area also convey their research questions,
as the latter are much more focused and specific. Gina illustrates the role of these
different aspects of your research proposal:
(1)
Project title:
This is a precise statement about the research aims and area.
An example would be: ‘A study of the effects of research development pro-
grammes on postgraduate student learning’. You will then need to generate
research questions indicating the specific ways you will contribute to this
area.
(2)
A field of study:
This is much broader than a project title such as ‘postgrad-
uate student learning’. In defining your research area you will need to think
about what is your broad area and what are the boundaries of your research
area and what is excluded.
(3)
Overall research questions:
This defines what you are asking and finding
out about. For example: ‘How and in what ways do the current UK and
Australian research development programmes focus on and contribute to the
development of postgraduate student learning and research higher degree
success?’
(4)
Focal research questions:
Your overall research question then needs to be
broken down into focal research questions which provide a clear link to your
data generation or empirical and theoretical analysis.
The chapter now turns to some strategies that may help you to comprehensively
formulate your research area, title and questions.
Gaining an overview of the literature
and research
Gaining an overview of the theoretical and empirical debates in your research area
will generate an understanding of previous research and dominant approaches.
Whether you are inductively or deductively generating your focal research questions,
getting to know previous research in your area will help you to identify gaps in
Negotiating the Research Process
24
prevailing knowledge. In the early stages of her doctoral research, Harriet Churchill
spent much time ‘immersing herself in the literature’. Her supervisors had advised
her to read around her research area and identify some ‘gaps in knowledge’. In hind-
sight, Harriet felt it took her a year or so to demystify this process. Later on in the
research process, Harriet developed strategies that aid thinking about previous
knowledge via gaining an overview of a research area.These consisted of identifying
seminal works and literature overviews, thinking about the research approaches and
questions that have been developed, devising ways of presenting research and popular
debates using diagrams or charts and asking her supervisors about key empirical and
theoretical contributions.
BOX 2.1
Gaining an overview of the literature relevant to
your research area 
Ask yourself:
•
What previous research has been conducted? 
•
What have been the main research questions?
•
What kinds of questions have been asked, i.e. descriptive, explanatory or exploratory? 
•
What has the previous research concluded? 
•
What have been the main approaches/perspectives within previous research? 
•
What are the key concepts and conceptual debates? 
•
What debates/writers/topics or approaches interest me most? 
•
Are there any empirical gaps in the area? 
•
Are there any underdeveloped or less utilised approaches? 
Strategies for gaining an overview may include:
•
Regularly review your detailed reading notes with a view to seeking to identify com-
mon research questions, approaches and claims across studies.
•
Use speed and scan reading to gain an overview of a text.
•
Identify literature reviews and area overviews.
•
Identify seminal work.
•
Map out key methodological approaches to date.
•
Seek to identify and define key concepts in your research area.
•
Map out theoretical differences between studies.
•
Use tables/charts/diagrams to summarise large amounts of information.
Sonali Shah was faced with the need to re-design her doctoral study once she dis-
covered her initial proposal was not original or appropriate, a process that involved
much uncertainty and anxiety:
Formulating a Research Question
25
The direction of my research changed somewhat after a literature search. I realised
that my original research topic had been investigated before, I would not be adding
anything new to knowledge.This led to fear about what my research would be. It was
a combination of my supervisor lending me a book and thinking about the gaps in
the research done in my area that prompted my final PhD direction. I reformulated
my research questions around a study on investigating what influences career devel-
opment and success for disabled people. I was very enthusiastic about this, espe-
cially since much of the existing research in relation to the employment of disabled
people tended to focus either on their under-employment or unemployment. I was
encouraged that I would definitely be contributing something new to knowledge.
Sonali demonstrates a systematic approach to devising her research questions.The
process of engaging with the previous research in her area led her to abandon her
initial research area. However, with persistence, critical thinking and support from
her supervisor, she was able then to identify a fruitful gap in existing knowledge
which provided the basis for an alternative research design.
Generating research questions from a period of
data collection
An inductive approach to formulating your general and focal research questions can
involve focusing one’s questions after an initial period of fieldwork (Mason, 2002).
Some qualitative ethnographic approaches, for example, aim to generate questions fol-
lowing a period of ‘immersion’ in the research setting.The aim is to link your ques-
tions more to the prominent issues and themes arising from the research setting or lived
experience rather than from prior academic research knowledge, popular social repre-
sentations or even the researcher’s own preconceptions (see Atkinson et al., 2001;
Crang and Cook, 2006; Mason, 2002 for ethnographic approaches). However, make
sure you have a clear rationale and timeframe for preliminary fieldwork. Several of our
contributors noted the complexity of managing this phase and approach. They dis-
cussed the need to be quite strict on the time allowed for this initial period of ‘explo-
ration’and quite disciplined in ensuring they did go on to focus their research in specific
ways.Part of the problem could be that you need to think further about what is required
and feasible for doctoral research.The next four sections consider prominent issues in
research question formulation: quantitative research questions; questions that are too
vague; questions that are too restrictive; feasibility issues and ‘originality’.
Negotiating the Research Process
26
Common issues in research question
formulation
Thinking quantitatively
Whether your intended research project will use qualitative or quantitative research
methods, or a mixed approach, the process of finalising a set of research questions is
similar. Quantitative approaches, however, are suited to asking particular questions
leading to the generation of quantitative data and the analysis of such data. Blaikie
(2003: 11) describes the process as follows:
•
The research problem: This is generally a very broad problem, such as ‘the appar-
ent lack of concern about environmental issues among many people and the unwill-
ingness of many to act responsibly with regard to these issues’. This is too broad
and unwieldy as it stands, so must be reduced down to some coherent and measur-
able questions.
•
The research questions: These are needed to turn the broad research problem into a
researchable set of questions. For instance: (1) To what extent is environmentally respon-
sible behaviour practised? (2) Why are there variations in the levels of environmentally
responsible behaviour?
•
The research objectives: Each question must then be reduced to another set of
objectives in order to explore, describe, understand, evaluate or assess the social
phenomena.
•
What data can be collected: Deciding what empirical evidence can be collected has
a significant bearing on the final formulation of questions and objectives.You need to
ask: What can realistically be observed? How can data be recorded? How can the
data be analysed?
Is your question too vague?
Having a research question that is excessively broad or too vague is a common problem
among doctoral students. Often this situation merely means that further ‘progressive
focusing’ needs to occur.There needs to be further thinking through of vague ques-
tions to turn them into more focused ones. Gina Wisker, Harriet Churchill and John
Roberts all felt that, on reflection, their PhD research questions remained too vague
for too long. Working with vague questions led them to amass a huge amount of
data, some of which they did not have time to analyse. It took Gina eighteen months
to arrive at a ‘formulated research question’. Harriet and John undertook some field-
work before they focused their research questions. Harriet felt that, in hindsight, her
research could have been more focused in the initial stages. In practice, Harriet
focused her research quite a lot during the data analysis and writing up stages:
Formulating a Research Question
27
The research, looking at lone mothers’experiences of caring and providing for children
at a time of national policy change in supporting parenting and parental employment,
could have been enhanced by a more focused approach earlier on.There were many
facets to the final thesis – some of which I could have focused on more – such as pro-
fessional discourses on parents’ support needs, mothers’ concerns around parenting,
mothers’ strategies for financially providing for their children and so on. Having quite
broad research questions meant that a lot of ‘focusing the research’ actually occurred
in data analysis and writing phases – however by then I was already restricted by the
data I had and lacked the time to focus in some of the directions I wanted to (because
this would have required more data collection). Overall, though, by the end of my
thesis I had a much more comprehensive picture of the research area, and now I feel
more able to generate focused research questions.
John Roberts also took the approach of ‘letting a focus emerge’ from his field-
work. However, a problem for John was that he gathered a lot of data covering a
broad theoretical focus, which he did not have the time to analyse within his doc-
toral research. Some of his data did alternatively provide useful material, though, for
subsequent publications and research:
My original research title was to conduct an ethnographic study of Speaker’s Corner.
I aimed to immerse myself in its everyday activities in order to understand the various
social processes and relationships (i.e. how the audience, speakers and policy
behave) that contribute towards, and help reproduce, its identity as a place for free
speech. So I entered the research field with a vague idea. However, this had not yet
been formulated into one definable research question. Two further turning points
occurred. First, I stumbled over a brilliant social history book that described an earlier
version of Hyde Park Corner speeches. I then set out to trace the history of public
speaking at Hyde Park. Second, I discovered a whole wealth of historical information
about the regulation of public speaking in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries at
Hyde Park at Kew Public Records Office. Later on though only one area of data
informed my thesis, the other areas informed subsequent journal articles.
Is your research question too narrowly defined or restrictive?
At the other end of the spectrum is the problem of your questions being too restrictive.
This is a problem whereby questions are too loaded with prior assumptions and com-
mon sense connections that explanatory capacity becomes restricted. As a supervisor,
Gina Wisker often encourages students to ‘unpack questions that are too narrowly
Negotiating the Research Process
28
defined’ for the purpose of a PhD. Gina gives the example of a student seeking to
establish ‘How and why do girls fail in school?’This question begins with ‘too many
assumptions that have not been critically subjected to rigorous analysis’:
This research question already gives the sense of a fore-grounded conclusion –
that girls fail in school – thus the question from the outset rejects a body of con-
tradictory evidence and closes off explanatory avenues. In this case the student
needs to read more about this topic carefully to identify the debates in the area
and a gap in knowledge rather than going over old ground. He needs to ask more
open questions of the research area and population rather than prejudging and so
narrowing responses and interactions into a pre-determined focus.
In this case, Gina facilitated a critical analysis of the literature and research in the area
by helping her student to devise ‘a kind of matrix to describe and evaluate the ways
in which previous authors were exploring and engaging with the issues’.Then ‘from
this analysis of previous research we generated an appropriate research question’ –
one that ‘goes beyond an initial exploratory statement’ and one that gets to the ‘heart
of the work, the issues, the concerns – so that theories interrogate and scaffold the
exploration and questioning’.
BOX 2.2
Unpacking your research question 
Ask yourself:
•
Do my questions pre-suppose any explanatory relationships?
•
Do my questions uphold any assumptions about the research area? On what basis
are these sound? Is there any contradictory evidence?
•
Do my questions make assumptions about cause and effect relationships? Are these
relationships disputed by any research? 
•
Do my research questions indicate a particular theoretical or methodological
approach? What other theories and approaches in the area are there? 
•
What do others such as my supervisor think about my questions?
Is your question going to facilitate an original
contribution to knowledge? 
Harriet Churchill felt her PhD research suffered from a lack of focal research ques-
tions. Later on in her study she felt if she had focused her research more after some
Formulating a Research Question
29
preliminary analysis of early interviews she could have generated a more ‘original’
research project. In the final data analysis stage, Harriet realised her initial interviews
raised what could have been some more original lines of inquiry. However, Harriet
reflects that changing her research question and following new leads in the early
stages of her PhD felt like having to ‘start again’ or take a step backwards.
Making an original contribution to knowledge certainly can be a tough criterion
to meet within doctoral research. However, originality is likely to emerge through
the ongoing process of deeply engaging with an area of interest and your research
activities. Gina Wisker describes how her PhD students often experience a ‘learning
leap’ that occurs in the latter stages of generating a thesis.This ‘learning leap’ is where
the ‘real question or real contribution to knowledge emerges in the later stages of the
thesis’.After this ‘leap’ there is a kind of conceptual penny-drop phase that brings the
thesis together and ‘work starts to be theorised and conceptualised in more complex
and coherent ways’.The student begins to develop their capacities for making a con-
tribution to understanding and knowledge in their subject area.
What is important is to try not to dwell on nor deny these ‘problems or concerns’
but to seek to establish whether your aims are too broad or vague or narrow and to
seek ways to appropriately focus and justify your research. If you feel unsure of your
focus, find it difficult to articulate or establish where your study fits into a wider pic-
ture of academic knowledge – then you will need to continue with the process of
turning your ‘general enthusiasm’ for a subject into a ‘clearly defined research project’
guided by clearly formulated questions.The emphasis here is on the continual and
active engagement on the part of the researcher with the issues of originality and
prior knowledge – indicating that questions neither fall from the sky nor suddenly hit
us in a moment of Eureka! clarity. Rather, they are formulated through a process of
thinking about your research area, interests and design.
Thinking about feasibility
Phillips and Pugh (2005) found that PhD students often under-estimate how much
time and effort is required for each stage of the research process and for their overall
project.Thinking about, and getting advice on, the ‘do-ability’ of your research pro-
ject will be an important aspect of devising your research questions and approach.
BOX 2.3
Thinking about feasibility
This is about linking the aims of your project with the requirements of a PhD and the
resources available to you for your doctoral studies.
Ask yourself:
•
What is required from doctoral research? (e.g. ask your supervisor, read your university
regulations)
Negotiating the Research Process
30
(Continued)
•
What resources are available to support my research? (e.g. time, IT, training support,
conference budget)
•
Do I have any particular constraints to consider? (e.g. other commitments, lack of
resources, part-time enrolment, juggling a research job with PhD research)
The fit between your research questions and
overall design
As you generate your general and focal research questions, you will also be thinking
about your research design as a whole. In moving to your overall research design you
will then need to specify the theoretical and methodological frameworks to your
study.The main principles guiding your design are to ensure a consistent fit between
your research questions, your methodological and theoretical approach and the
resources and requirements for undertaking your PhD research. This consistency
directly relates to producing a valid and effective research design.You need to ensure
that you are able to fulfil the requirements for doctoral research and able to complete
the study within the deadline required (Mason, 2002).The following two boxes iden-
tify some of the crucial considerations in research design. These issues are covered
widely in the research methods literature and some useful resources are given below.
BOX 2.4
Ontological and epistemological underpinnings 
to your research
In thinking about your general research area and what you wish to find out about – you
will need to think about your underlying ontological and epistemological frameworks.
Your ontology relates to what you are identifying as social reality and what we think
social reality consists of. For example, are you wanting to examine decisions, identities,
institutions, discourses or experiences? All of these concepts refer to different ‘things’
and you need to think about what you think these concepts represent. Think about:
•
What is the nature of social phenomena indicated by our research area, title and
questions?
•
What alternative representations of reality could we envisage?
•
How am I conceptualising social phenomena?
•
How are these conceptualisations contested in the social sciences?
•
How do these conceptualisations inform my methodological approach?
(Continued)
Formulating a Research Question
31
(Continued)
Your epistemological stance relates to how you conceptualise knowledge and your
underlying theory of knowledge:
•
What do you consider to be evidence of the social realities defined above?
•
How do you envisage gaining ‘knowledge’ about them?
You are likely to return to these questions many times during your research! (see Blaikie,
2000; Mason, 2002).
Key Points to Remember

Formulating a research question emerges from the process of engaging with
the debates, knowledge and approaches in your research field.

Seek ways of gaining an overview of your area.

Ask yourself what have been the dominant theoretical, empirical and method-
ological approaches in your research area.

Seek feedback on your research questions – ask yourself and others if your
questions are too broad or restrictive.

Think about the links between your research question (as content and type)
and the possible theoretical and methodological approaches you can take.
SUGGESTED READING
Blaikie, N. (2000) Designing Social Research: The Logic of Anticipation.
Malden: Polity Press.
Creswell, J.W. (2002) Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative and Mixed
Method Approaches. London: Sage.
Mason, J. (2002) Qualitative Researching, 2nd edn. London: Sage.
Punch, K.F. (2000) Developing Effective Research Proposals. London: Sage.
Saunders, M., Lewis, P. and Thornhill, A. (2003) Research Methods for
Business Students, 3rd edn. Upper. Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Negotiating the Research Process
32
Chapter 3
Choosing and Changing
Supervisor
What this Chapter Includes:

Insights into the nature of the supervisor–student relationship

Suggestions on how to make the right choice first time

Details of common problems that occur in the relationship

Reasons for seeking to change your supervisor

Suggestions how to do this both informally and formally

The process of finding a new supervisor
Making the right choice
Your relationship with your supervisor is probably the most crucial variable that
will affect how you experience the PhD journey, your intellectual development
and indeed whether you submit on time. All of the study guides include chapters
offering copious insights and direct advice about managing your supervisor. We
suggest you familiarise yourself with these too, as the more preparation for this
interesting relationship the better. However, often little importance is attached to
specifically discussing how you end up with a supervisor, and also what to do
when things go wrong.This chapter therefore deals with the early stage of find-
ing or being allocated a supervisor and pre-empting any difficulties that may
arise.
The level of control you have over choosing your supervisor may vary.There are
normally two processes whereby you obtain a supervisor.The more traditional route is
that on application to a department you are allocated a supervisor based on a suitable
match of academic expertise with your proposed area of work. Many institutions
operate a system of joint supervision – one person is appointed as the ‘lead’ and
another the ‘second’ supervisor. Often this is an advantage because you can demand
two people’s time and attention instead of one! It also means that when one takes time
out for whatever reason you still have another supervisor to consult.There are also
downsides to this system though, as three people in the relationship can be crowded,
especially if the two academics have polarised views on how your PhD should be
conducted. In these scenarios it is often a case of allowing them to squabble amongst
themselves!
The second process of obtaining a supervisor is one that relies on you proactively
seeking out individuals that you want to work with.This approach is described by
Claire Maxwell:
I developed a research proposal based on my MSc thesis. From the research pro-
posal I was able to identify the ‘experts’ in the field who were based at universities
in the region where I lived. I sent my proposal and CV via email to the three or four
academics and one potential supervisor got back to me almost immediately, offer-
ing to meet to discuss my proposal further.
Whether you are aware of whom you would like to work with or whether you
are happy to let the institution take care of the allocation, this chapter will equip
you with a basic framework to assess whether the supervisor is the right match
for you.
The ingredients of a successful
relationship
Clearly the first ingredient of a wholesome and productive relationship with a mentor
relates to the extent to which their academic expertise matches your own initial inter-
ests. Because PhD topics are so specific, do not expect an identical match (a super-
visor who is too close to your exact topic can also be far too competitive) but instead
look for someone who is generally in your subject area. Looking for a generic spe-
cialist will also increase your scope of institutions, particularly if your family circum-
stances commit you to a certain locality. Once likely mentors have been identified,
simply make direct contact by emailing your CV and a research proposal (make this
concise – two A4 pages for example).This will start off the process of application and
a phase of both parties checking out suitability.
When you are called for an interview or indeed offered a place, other points to
consider are the department’s rating in the Research Assessment Exercise (which mea-
sures research excellence against a criterion), the facilities for postgraduates (such as a
computer, office space, conference grants, library account, photocopying allowance)
and the general atmosphere of the environment.
Negotiating the Research Process
34
BOX 3.1
Some useful questions to ask your prospective supervisor
•
How will you be able to support me if your area of expertise is not that related to my
PhD research?
•
How many students have you supervised?
•
How do they see the role of the supervisor?
•
What could I expect? [Claire Maxwell]
When selecting or being allocated a supervisor, of great concern to students is the
extent to which the academic has supervised before.Of course,an academic with a track
record of students submitting in good time, passing their viva and going on to have a
healthy career is an advantage, but do not dismiss younger, less experienced academics.
Their closeness to the PhD experience is added value, plus they will be more clued up
on the changing nature of the PhD, which can be used to your advantage.Also, more
junior staff will probably have more time than senior academics who are over-burdened
with commitments, many of which take them away from the university. It is worth
pointing out also that academics who take on PhD candidates are bound by systems that
check their performance, making sure that their quality of supervision reaches the
appropriate standard and that they are steering the student in the right direction.
Three contributors have described the third ingredient, personal compatibility, as
the most important aspect of the supervisor–student relationship. It can be the
make-or-break element of the PhD experience.Although it is difficult to assess how
much you will ‘gel’ with a person on the basis of a few meetings, this element
requires making an early judgement call.
BOX 3.2
Bill Armer, a mature PhD student who did not have a successful first supervisory rela-
tionship, summarises the mission to find a suitable supervisor: ‘What you are looking for
is a person with whom you can “do business” on a personal level.’
You may be allocated a supervisor who works in an area that is not directly the
same as yours. Sometimes this is not problematic but there are times when this lack
of specialisation can be a cause for concern. Sonali Shah expressed concerns regard-
ing her allocated supervisor:
Choosing and Changing Supervisor
35
I have always been confused with regards to the basis on which my supervisor
was selected as there seemed to be a mismatch of methodological interests. Her
background was in quantitative research and I wanted to develop skills in qualita-
tive research. The second concern was that my supervisor’s field of expertise was
nothing to do with disability, which was a primary factor in my research. Moreover
she was more of a ‘teaching academic’ rather than a ‘research academic’.
Sonali’s case covers a wide range of concerns relating to who mentors you through
the process and demonstrates what scenarios could have been grounds for seeking an
alternative supervisor. However, despite these differences, in this case the personal
support and enthusiasm from the supervisor outweighed the academic mismatch to
reveal a fruitful and successful relationship.
What type of relationship can I expect?
Once a supervisor has committed to guiding you through the process there is always
a ‘getting to know you’ phase, which will take a few months as you settle into the
institution and start to work towards your research design. However, the relationship
often starts off laden with expectations on both sides.The supervisor most probably
reflects on their own relationship with their supervisor, and also other mentoring
relationships and will bring pre-determined expectations to the relationship. Equally,
students will no doubt come to the relationship with many expectations and
unknowns. Early on a reality check is needed where these expectations are acknowl-
edged and unpacked. Claire Maxwell, who completed a PhD after five years’ part-
time research, describes the disjuncture between her ‘ideal type’ and the reality of the
supervisory relationship:
Before I started my PhD I had this fantasy about what it would be like. My super-
visor would be this incredible woman, with whom I would form a close bond based
on friendship, respect and intellectual stimulation. I envisaged I would spend many
an afternoon round her house, sitting on the living room floor drinking cups of tea
and putting the world to rights! The reality was quite different.
Managing your own expectations and that of the supervisor is something that needs
to be checked from the outset and revisited at different points in the process. In the ini-
tial meetings the university regulations should be made clear.These will include what are
Negotiating the Research Process
36
regarded as the appropriate number of supervision meetings (usually about ten per year)
and how these meetings will be conducted.This could include a discussion about work
expectations,communication expectations and general ground rules for engagement (see
Chapter 15). Again, Claire Maxwell reflects on the importance of re-establishing the
parameters of the relationship periodically to take account of new situations:
At the end of every term or year, I should have had an up-front discussion with my
supervisor about how we both felt our supervisor–student relationship was going
and discussed any changes we needed to make.
One point that is important to convey about the supervisor–student relationship is
that the boundaries of the relationship can often be very different from other relation-
ships you will have previously experienced in education. Bill Armer reflects on the dif-
ferences between the undergraduate and postgraduate relationship with tutors:
The relationship between a PhD research student and her/his supervisor(s) is very
different to that between taught student and course teacher. The former is a long-
term and dynamic thing, the latter fleeting and fixed in its co-ordinates – ‘you tutee,
me tutor’. In contrast, the PhD student is more of an apprentice than a tutee.
This notion of ‘an apprentice’ is a worthy analogy.When you start off, the supervisor
is the senior expert but it is hoped that in working towards and gaining the PhD the
student will come out the other end as an intellectual equal.What will be new in this
relationship is how different the parameters and boundaries are compared to other types
of formal relationships.The relationship, while being framed by the seriousness of get-
ting the business done, usually takes on an element of personal mentoring, mutual
respect and the kind of familiarity that could be considered professional friendship. Bill
Armer explains how these elements of a successful personal working relationship can be
summarised by the concept ‘rapport’:
Supervisors have a need to feel that their student is worthy of respect both profes-
sionally and personally. Friendship is not necessary here, but a certain degree of
rapport is highly desirable for a working relationship.
Choosing and Changing Supervisor
37
So, by now you should have figured out that the relationship with your supervisor is
incredibly important but equally of a type that has not been experienced elsewhere.
The next bit of news is that it is like the tide: always shifting!
Shifts in the relationship
Like all relationships, that between the supervisor and the student is not static but
shifts with time and process.As you become more familiar with each other and the
expectations of doing a PhD, the relationship will alter.This is a sign of progress, as
Bill Armer suggests:
The balance of the relationship must shift from that of the naive PhD researcher
in need of firm direction and guidance at the beginning. Over time this will ideally
change to a passing need for advice and ultimately a mutual discussion between
equals.
However,with these changes can occur problems.Many students experience hiccups in
what is generally an effective and supportive relationship.This can be because of your
own issues, such as a lack of progress, frustration with fieldwork, personal problems or
time constraints. Blips that occur in the relationship are often related to miscommuni-
cation and unclear expectations, both of which can be sorted out through a specific
meeting initiated by you.
BOX 3.3
Bill Armer says: ‘Communicate your worries clearly, but also listen carefully to the
response.Very often, the problem is simply one of mutual understanding and a “clear the
air” meeting is all that is required.’
The supervisor’s own career, work commitments and personal circumstances can
interfere with your relationship and work trajectory, particularly if they take a
sabbatical [study leave], become a visiting fellow elsewhere, or have time off for sick-
ness or maternity/paternity leave. Foreseeable interference regarding supervision
should be picked up by the postgraduate tutor, who will put temporary measures in
place. Other issues that make you feel dissatisfied with the relationship can usually be
ironed out by taking some of the following solutions to short-term problems:
Negotiating the Research Process
38
•
Call on the postgraduate tutor for independent, confidential advice.
•
Seek a second supervisor (temporary or permanent) or rely on the second supervisor
if there are problems with the first.
•
Proactively find support from others in the department.
•
Use supervision through telephone and email contact for a limited period.
•
Use your own networks of support.
•
Seek further personal support through the counselling service (see Chapter 18).
If your dissatisfaction with the supervisory arrangements is not just a passing
phase, or a particular incident has left you feeling wronged, then there are several
courses of action available.After all, we are all privy to the horror stories that circu-
late through the postgraduate networks relating to awful supervision and disruptive
relationships that reduce students to gibbering wrecks! If you feel that there is some-
thing problematic in the relationship with your supervisor, or feel strongly that you
are not getting the support you need, then there are various informal and formal
steps that can be taken.
BOX 3.4
The postgraduate tutor is an important mediator, source of independent support, advice
and expert knowledge in this role. They should be considered a first port of call before
taking issues further and a solution can often be found with their help.
First you must remember that any university is a complex,hierarchical organisation
and operates rigid systems,rules and procedures.Where you feel there is a case of neg-
ligence or a case for making a formal complaint about an incident, the official route
must be taken. University Student Complaints procedures are set down in stone in
the regulations (all accessible on the institution’s intranet) and further advice should
be sought from the Student Union in these matters. There are strict procedures,
requirements to submit evidence and stages to the complaints procedure that must be
followed. Arming yourself with knowledge of the complaints procedure is a critical
starting point.
When your supervisor gets another job
One of the common events that can disrupt a student’s PhD progress is their super-
visor taking up a wonderful job that they simply couldn’t turn down at another
university. Sometimes this can be on another continent! Usually the outcomes are
not so drastic as academics often negotiate taking their students with them as part of
Choosing and Changing Supervisor
39
their new work package.This should protect your financial status and maintain your
relationship with your supervisor. However, geography can be the biggest upheaval:
if your supervisor moves to a neighbouring city then this is not too problematic, but
if they relocate further afield then a major decision needs to be made on your part.
Students are often given the choice of changing institution and keeping their super-
visor, or they are faced with staying put and having a new supervisor.
Sometimes, if funds permit and all are in agreement, the original supervisor can
become what is known as a ‘long arm’ supervisor who will still be involved in your
progress and guidance, but your main supervision will be conducted by a new mentor
at the original institution where you are registered.This is often the best result as you
can then secure continuity of supervision and receive the fresh input of a new super-
visor. However, where supervisory relationships become less conventional there is
often ground for confusion, limitations on contact and a good relationship poten-
tially turns sour. Claire Maxwell reflects on how, in her second year, her supervisor
announced she was taking a career break but would continue her supervisory role.
While this seemed only a minor change, Claire felt that in hindsight there was con-
fusion surrounding these new circumstances:
I did not really proactively try to re-negotiate our relationship, so we were both
clear what would be expected. Due to this change in circumstances, my university
department had to re-assign me a new supervisor, as I needed to have someone
responsible for me who worked at the university where I was registered. It took
them 18 months to do this!
Given the current emphasis from the Higher Education Agency and the UK Grad
Programme on providing effective and consistent supervision and positive postgraduate
experiences, we certainly hope that Claire’s wait of 18 months for an additional super-
visor is a thing of the past. Inevitably, if your supervisor leaves the institution there will
be adjustments to make but be assured that other people in the institution, such as the
postgraduate tutor, will be looking out for you and offer’s an official first port of call.
These issues described above are general characteristics that many supervisor-
student relationships experience. However, we also want to acknowledge that there
are times when the relationship becomes defunct and something needs to be done
about it!
Reasons for changing supervisor
As with all relationships, there may come a time when you consider the dynamics to
have reached ‘irretrievable breakdown’.There could be a million reasons for this, but
Negotiating the Research Process
40
what they all lead to is an unworkable relationship that causes you personal distress and
intellectual stagnation. Christine Rogers notes that there can be intractable difficulties
if the ages of the supervisor and student are similar and there is an authoritarian streak
to the mentoring:
My supervisor was only a few years older than me and made me feel like I was
inferior. She told me what to do and said that I should use her experience. I’m
afraid this way of working brought out the rebel in me.
The rapport that we previously mentioned as a key ingredient to a relationship
simply may not be there and, as in all walks of life, there can be a clash of styles and
personalities.Where you feel the relationship is simply not working after you have
made a considerable effort, then it is time to think about approaching the postgrad-
uate tutor to discuss changing your supervisor. However, this may be easier said than
done.Bill Armer reflects on how,despite both parties amicably agreeing that the rela-
tionship was not productive and that a change of supervisor was needed, the official
procedures took time and negotiation to fulfil:
I found that my supervisor could only withdraw by claiming that I was failing to
progress in a satisfactory manner, whilst I had, as it were, to petition for divorce on
the grounds of an ‘irretrievable breakdown’ in the relationship.
If you feel that the relationship is tainted with unprofessional conduct on the part
of the supervisor then this is a clear reason to seek change and possibly take the mat-
ter further.Prejudicial attitudes,practices and behaviours should be taken up through
formal routes. In cases where romantic relationships develop between the student and
supervisor the university’s code of conduct should be consulted on these matters.
There are inherent power issues here due to the academic holding a supervisory role,
which means that mentoring usually cannot continue because of a conflict of per-
sonal interest.
Realising that you are in the wrong relationship may not be a result of any personal
incompatibility, but a wider realisation of what you want out of the PhD. Nicola
Scott’s case is an interesting reflection on how the root of the discontent may be that
you are in the wrong discipline or department. Nicola studied politics up to masters
level before winning a scholarship in social anthropology,which was a new discipline
for her. She explains what happened:
Choosing and Changing Supervisor
41
Despite the fact that my supervisor and department were excellent, throughout my
first year I began to feel isolated from my peers. Consequently, I began to lose self-
confidence in my ability to do a PhD. Feeling privileged to be a scholarship holder
and looking forward to conducting overseas fieldwork, the passion for my topic
prevented me from deserting my studies. Once I was abroad I had time to think
about what I wanted from my PhD and realised I could not continue unless I could
return to the discipline I felt most comfortable with. I informed my supervisor and
was very open and honest about my preference to discontinue with anthropology.
My supervisor was very understanding and I made a case to transfer my funding
to another department where I found a new supervisor. I only wish I had informed
my first supervisor much sooner about my wish to transfer rather than spend a
year worrying about the discipline within which my PhD was located.
Feeling ‘at home’ with a discipline is as important as making the right decisions
about who will be your mentor and whether you can do business together. Nicola’s
scenario highlights that recognising there is a problem early on and seeking advice can
save much angst and time. If you want to make changes do not think that you will be
the first person to do so – these changes are much more common than you think.
Finding a new mentor
Where both parties are happy with a change of supervisory arrangements, finding a
new supervisor within the department can work fairly informally. Christine Rogers
explains how she decided to leave her original supervisor, who was chosen because
of an already established supervisory relationship at undergraduate level, for someone
who was working within an area closer to her own research area:
My original supervisor was understanding and thought the change was good, as we
had worked together before. There was no animosity as the reasons for ‘leaving’
him were not a reflection on him but a desire to work with someone who had some
research experience in education.
Speaking to the relevant people, completing the paperwork and checking with the
funding body are the minimum requirements for making a change. Prepare for delays.
Finding a new mentor when academics are often over-burdened with duties and students
is not necessarily easy. Remember though the department also has a responsibility to
Negotiating the Research Process
42
ensure you have adequate supervision, as with most solutions for difficulties with the
PhD being proactive in recruiting a new supervisor is the best step forward.Seeking out
a new mentor rather than relying on allocation is particularly important second time
round because you want to make sure that the questions you did not ask initially are not
only asked this time but you will also be better placed to know if the answers are accept-
able to you.Don’t be surprised if there are also internal politics that you have to manage,
including dismantling some stereotypes about being a ‘troublemaker’.When scouting the
department for a new mentor Bill Armer was concerned that he was perceived as
‘damaged goods’ by prospective supervisors:
Without being officially declared an untouchable, it was amazing how many mem-
bers of the Faculty had a full workload already, had study leave scheduled for next
year or did not feel that my research topic fell within their area. This does little for
one’s self-esteem!
It should not be under-estimated how difficult any phase of unsettlement may be
when changing supervisor, finding a new one and starting the process all over again.
It is quite normal at this time to feel vulnerable, inadequate, low in confidence and
frustrated at a situation that you feel is out of your hands. Often taking a few weeks
out to reflect, get advice and make some positive decisions is a productive exercise.
After all, nothing worthwhile can be written while the infrastructure of your PhD
is shaky. However, this unsettled phase should only be short term, as between your
own motivation to change, proactively seeking an alternative mentor and the uni-
versity system recognising there is a problem, solutions should be found before your
work is significantly affected.
BOX 3.5
It is as much for you to actively interview a prospective supervisor as vice-versa.
Key Points to Remember

Whether you approach an academic or you are allocated a supervisor, con-
sider whether you can ‘do business’ with this person.

The student–supervisor relationship is unique, often based on informalities yet
framed in a hierarchical and bureaucratic system.
Choosing and Changing Supervisor
43

Expect the relationship to shift as you progress and be prepared to re-negotiate
expectations.

Supervisors can move institutions, leaving you with some difficult decisions to
make.

Make regular contact with other sources of support in the department, particularly
the postgraduate tutor.

Dissatisfaction with the supervisory arrangements can often be sorted out
amicably and informally.

Where more serious issues of unprofessional conduct occur then the
University complaints procedure is the best option.

Be guided by the rules and procedures – universities are big old bureaucracies.

When finding a new supervisor make sure you go over all the questions you
now know you should have asked before!
SUGGESTED READING
Cryer, P. (2006) The Research Student’s Guide to Success, 3rd edn.
Maidenhead: Open University Press. Chapter 6 ‘Interacting with
Supervisors’.
Eley, A.R. and Jennings, R. (2005) Effective Postgraduate Supervision:
Improving the Student/Supervisor Relationship. Maidenhead: Open
University Press.
Marshall, S. and Green, N. (2004) Your PhD Companion. Oxford: How To
Books. Chapter 3 ‘You and Your Supervisor’.
Rugg, G. and Petre, M. (2004) The Unwritten Rules of PhD Research.
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Negotiating the Research Process
44
Chapter 4
Managing the Ethics of Academia
What this Chapter Includes:

Why ethics are relevant in PhD research

How ethics will affect your PhD

How ethics will affect you as a researcher

The role of Research Ethics Committees

Where to get further information about ethical guidelines
Why bother with ethics?
All research conducted, whether in the natural sciences or social sciences and
humanities,involves ethical issues to a lesser or greater degree.It has been argued that
all knowledge production has ethical implications (Miller and Bell, 2002) and there-
fore will be of concern to all postgraduates. Primarily this is because, as researchers, we
are engaging with the social world and human beings to access information and
inquire into people’s lives and experiences. Ethics, ethical dilemmas and the
responsibilities of researchers to produce ethical knowledge have increasingly been
written about, with the number of publications and student resources growing in
this area.All of the academic disciplines have their own historical development of
ethical practice, as ethics is not only about ‘doing’ good research, but protecting the
reputation and maintaining high research standards for the individual researcher,
the discipline and the wider research community. There has been much talk in
social sciences about the ‘ethical turn’ whereby the process of ethics, monitoring
research and surveying what researchers are doing has created a bureaucracy of eth-
ical governance which has both negative and positive implications for the quality of
data (Crow et al., 2006). There are many dimensions of ‘ethics in research’ to the
extent that students first exploring ethical issues in their own studies are often over-
whelmed by the enormity of the literature out there and the potentially vast num-
ber of issues to consider. Teela Sanders found that in her musings over ethics and
ethical governance in academia (researching in the sex industry, ethics has been a
preoccupation for some years), it is useful to examine ethics in three separate ways.
1
Ethics as an intellectual subject that raises important and interesting questions about
the nature of interacting with respondents. Being ethical can involve enhancing
research ‘reflexivity’ (reflecting on the role of the researcher in the relationship with
their research ‘subjects’, the fieldwork setting and the creation of knowledge). In
addition, ethical dilemmas and decision making raise wider philosophical questions
about the nature and production of knowledge, its validity and reliability. For instance,
Le Voi (2002: 155) makes the direct point that ‘faking research is a case of fraud
against the whole process of research’.
2
Ethical practice can be considered in relation to responsibilities and rights. Good
practice in research has concepts such as respect and beneficence as core princi-
ples of research procedures. Individuals have the right not to be introduced to harm
(whether physical, emotional or psychological); there are rights around privacy, con-
fidentiality, anonymity and informed consent. It is the researcher’s responsibility (and
also that of the institution) to carry out ethically sound social inquiry that does not
harm anyone. Equally, as a researcher, your own rights need to be considered in
relation to potential harms and safety issues.
3
Ethics can be considered in terms of the procedural expectations of doing research in
a university setting.There is a whole bureaucracy around ethics in the form of Research
Ethics Committees, internal processes such as ethics panels and forms to fill in for that
final seal of approval before the project begins. The procedural expectations around
ethics flag up legal issues in relation to legislation such as the Data Protection Act,
1984, and the Freedom of Information Act, 2000. Beyond these procedures though,
ethics needs to be considered and reviewed throughout the life of a research project.
BOX 4.1
Ethical governance
What has come to be known as ethical governance of the research industry is having an
impact on the processes of approval before research can get under way. This will filter
down to postgraduates who will have to justify that their project is ethical in formal ways,
according to official criteria.
As you can see, there is a lot to think about. But don’t get despondent. Seek out the
increasing number of textbooks, seminars or university courses on research ethics that
will help you clarify the specific issues you need to consider.This chapter acts as an intro-
duction to some key areas to think about when you are planning your research project.
Doing ethical research
The ethical issues that you will need to think about, plan for and design your
research around will be specific to your own study.The ethical dimensions will be
Negotiating the Research Process
46
determined by what your research questions are and,if you are doing fieldwork,then
ethical issues will arise from with whom, what and where fieldwork takes place.
Doing ethical research is also about taking part in a wider research community and
upholding academic integrity.The research community that you are representing and
involved with as a postgraduate student is based on a set of principles that supports
its reputation as a responsible profession.Within this there are criteria on which the
quality of research is judged and a set of expectations about ‘good’ and ‘bad’ research
methodology and design. Credibility is only given to research findings and projects
that stay within the ethical guidelines and uphold the integrity of the research com-
munity by promoting and practising ethically sound research.
Within these broader aims of maintaining (and indeed gaining for yourself) academic
integrity, there are some standard criteria you need to cover when conducting empiri-
cal studies that involve collecting information from individuals or doing secondary data
analysis. The key criteria, which you may remember from undergraduate methods
courses, are informed consent, confidentiality and anonymity.
BOX 4.2
Ethics as part of the data
‘I learned a great deal about my research from the ethical decisions that I was required
to make. They can reveal so much in terms of power relations in the research context –
we often forget that this is part of the fieldwork itself. Rather than treating these issues
as problems, they should be seen as obstacles that can provide their own rich source of
data.’
[Kate Williams]
The process of informed consent
In the Appendix you will find an example of an informed consent form and an
information sheet for respondents that Sharon Elley used when researching young
people’s experiences.These forms are examples of one type of procedure when asking
someone to take part in your research.The information sheet has specific details of
the project, such as the aims and objectives, who is associated with the research and
what will be required from the respondent.The informed consent form is the part
where permission is asked from the individual about their understanding of the pro-
ject, what is expected of them, their rights and their voluntary participation.
Gaining consent from people to be included in the research has been described as
a process and not a form. Sharon spent time at the beginning of the interview going
through the information sheet and explaining further any issues that were not clear
and taking questions from the young person.In addition,because the respondent was
under 18, she specifically wanted to gain written consent. However, it was important
not just to give the consent form to the young person to read and sign, but to go
Managing the Ethics of Academia
47
through the details of the consent form and make sure the respondent was clear
about what they were signing up for. Any further participation would also require
re-negotiation of any consent to take part, with the respondent having the right not
to participate further at any stage.
The process of informed consent needs to be thought about in relation to the spe-
cific characteristics and context of your project. Informed consent can be gained in
other ways, not just through a signed form. For instance, when Teela Sanders
researched sex workers she verbally explained the aims and objectives of the research,
what would be done with the findings and how the respondents’verbatim comments
would be used. She also set out what would be done with the transcripts and tapes
after the project had finished. Consent to participate in the study was then obtained
verbally with no additional consent form to sign.This was partly because of the prac-
ticalities of the places where the sex workers were interviewed, and also because the
sex workers often wanted to keep their identity completely secret (even from their
colleagues and the researcher), so they did not want their signature on a piece of
paper (see Sanders, 2005, 2006 for more details).
The principles and procedures surrounding informed consent have been hotly
debated, mainly questioning what it is that participants are consenting to (Miller and
Bell, 2002).There are also limitations to gaining informed consent because respon-
dents need to be able to understand what they are fully consenting to. For instance,
Coomber (2002) notes the limitations of gaining written consent in the case of
studying people with criminal convictions.Also, it may be the case that the full extent
or details of the specific research questions are not revealed to the respondents.
Despite the contentious nature of informed consent, the basic issue is that the
respondents are taking part in the research on a voluntary basis. Whatever format
informed consent takes in your project, you need to consider the following points:
•
What are you asking for?
•
How will you explain the research questions to the respondent?
•
How much is the consent process part of trust and rapport building?
•
What will you do with the data, who will listen to the recordings or see the transcripts?
•
Where will you store the information?
•
What support is in place for potential ‘fallout’ from interview?
•
How can you ensure confidentiality and anonymity, and harm-free research?
•
Are there communication barriers (language, capacity to understand, requirements for
people living with impairments)?
There has been some recent criticism about the over-zealous expectations around
gaining consent from people which can result in the ethics of the project overriding
the process of establishing trust and collecting data. Crow et al. (2006) note from
research findings that the production of data, and certainly good quality data, can be
hindered by an over-emphasis on informed consent. For instance, practical arrange-
ments for getting a form signed can override the relationship building that researchers
must do to gain rapport, and therefore can reduce participation rates.This highlights
Negotiating the Research Process
48
how approaches to ethical practice affect the relationship between the researcher and
the respondent and may have an influence on the process of data collection and sub-
sequent findings.
Confidentiality and anonymity
The rights of respondents to confidentiality are at the core of the responsibilities
and obligations of the researcher. Individual privacy needs to be respected and this
has significant implications for how the data is collected, analysed, stored, reported
and disseminated. Remember that a thesis is a public document and that anything
written for publication is accessible to the public.Therefore confidentiality is a key
point to consider, particularly when reporting findings and disseminating information
through the media for example.Also,in the information sheet (see Appendix 2), details
should be offered about where the information will be stored and who will have
access to the transcripts and tapes. Safe and secure storage is also a part of maintain-
ing ethical practice and should be considered before you have finished the project
(see Chapter 5).
Most cases of protecting anonymity are straightforward as respondents do not
want to be identified and there are standard processes for de-identifying individuals
so that the data cannot be traced back to them.However,anonymity is not just about
the individual that gave the information as other people and places can be identified
in the research.Findings may identify a town or city,an organisation or group,a place
or building, as well as individuals who are mentioned directly in the research. Becky
Tipper recalls how the issue of anonymity became a stumbling block in her research
with young children as unexpected dynamics between the respondents and the
purpose of the research brought into question the role of anonymised interviews:
Power relations are certainly important, but in subtle and surprising ways, and chil-
dren are far from simply passive and vulnerable research subjects. For instance,
conventionally in qualitative data all names and places are anonymised. However,
several children have asked for their real names to be used in publications. There
is a strong rationale for anonymisation, since it protects other people discussed in
interviews. Nevertheless, this project is designed explicitly to give children a ‘voice’
in an adult-focused society, and children have been keen to participate for pre-
cisely this reason. Having promised them a chance to present their perspectives,
am I hypocritical to insist that their names are anonymised?
Research is often about topics that are current to local and national communities
and can involve highly sensitive and controversial topics. Kate Williams was investi-
gating the community relationships that surrounded the rise of a resident action
Managing the Ethics of Academia
49
group to resist street prostitution in a local neighbourhood.Kate recounts how assuring
confidentiality was not straightforward:
Applying anonymity invariably places the researcher in a position of significant
responsibility as it is very difficult to guarantee. I made every attempt to secure
anonymity for my respondents, but felt uncomfortable as my fieldwork site and the
research area that I was covering had not only been very high profile in the region but
had also received a great deal of press attention nationally. Due to the controversial
nature of the research, I was only too aware that for certain key respondents, being
identified could potentially lead to real personal or professional threats and dangers.
Often ethical issues raise many more questions than answers! After all they often
entail moral and philosophical dilemmas that do not have obvious outcomes or solu-
tions. Even if your project is fairly conventional you will make decisions about what
anonymisation process you will adopt. For instance, will the data be anonymised at
the point of collection or transcription or be left until the analysis stage? When
anonymisation is completed how will you identify the respondents – by pseudonyms,
numbers, or stating key socio-demographic characteristics? A stage dedicated to
anonymising data will be required in your timetable.
BOX 4.3
Do no harm
All researchers have a ‘Duty of Care’ not to introduce any additional harm into partici-
pants’ lives. Maintaining respect, integrity and conducting research with strong regard for
moral and legal rights are the minimum expectations.
In some cases it may be appropriate to modify conventional practices.As there are
limitations with informed consent, confidentiality also has its limitations, and in
specific cases it is the researcher’s responsibility to break confidentiality, in the con-
text of other over-riding ethical concerns such as in relation to the safety of young
people.This is usually the case where the researcher is concerned that the respon-
dent is at risk of harm or has disclosed information of harm.The limits to confi-
dentiality must be set out in the informed consent stage (see the form in the
Appendix) and if incidents like this occur then seek support from supervisors or an
ethics panel at university.This highlights the limits of confidentiality but also how
researchers are accountable to a range of audiences and that research is not con-
ducted in a bubble but is a real life activity.
Negotiating the Research Process
50
BOX 4.4
Remember as a researcher you are bound by rules, protocols, guidelines and even legal
legislation (such as the Data Protection Act) that must inform your research practice.
One size does not fit all
Although there are basic criteria that are required by the academic community and
indeed Research Ethics Committees, there are always complications, exceptions and
dilemmas in ethical decision making. Different research groups present different ethical
issues. For instance, if you are researching vulnerable adults who are marginalised from
society, there are issues about exploitation and ‘taking information’ from respondents
who are relatively powerless in relation to material, social and intellectual resources.
Even at the dissemination stage, careful thought needs to be given to the potential
impact of findings on research participants, who can suffer further marginalisation (and
different issues may need thinking through when doing research with ‘elites’).If you are
researching certain groups in settings that affect their freedom and rights, such as a
prison or a hospital,there are other conditions to consider.Becky Tipper was doing her
PhD part-time whilst working on a research project. She reflects on how ethical issues
were at the forefront of her thinking when she started the project because her sample
group were young children.The age of the group of respondents raised particular issues
in relation to consent and power:
When I started out on this research project with children aged 7–11, it seemed that
the ethical concerns would be particularly complex. Was it really possible to obtain
‘informed consent’ from children? Could I be sure they fully understood what was
involved? What would I do if children revealed information about abuse or harm?
How could I minimise the potential imbalance of power and verbal articulacy in
interviews between young children and myself – an adult academic researcher? It
seemed that I would be navigating a practical and ethical minefield!
Different research methods that are applied in a project present different ethical
issues. Although the standard criteria described above are present in most of the
methods that span the qualitative and quantitative divide, different methods will
raise a variety of ethical issues. For example, doing covert research (which is usually
associated with ethnography and observations) is always considered an ethical stick-
ing point because of the centrality of informed consent and also the right to vol-
untary participation.Yet there may be certain circumstances where covert research
Managing the Ethics of Academia
51
is justifiable as there are no other ways to gain access to certain groups or activities
without having a significant impact on the group behaviour. Ethnographic meth-
ods, especially observation, can present the researcher with some serious dilemmas
that were not necessarily considered during the research design stage. Reflecting on
her own research with female sex workers in brothels and massage parlours, Teela
Sanders recalls ethical dilemmas around observing what happens in sex work venues.
Her success at building up co-operative relationships with informants presented new
ethical dilemmas:
When Astrid, an experienced sex worker with whom I had sat for many hours,
invited me into the room to ‘see how clinical it was’, I should not have been
shocked but perhaps delighted at the chance to move from the periphery where I
lurked to the centre as an insider. After all, I grappled, isn’t this the ultimate objec-
tive of the participant observer? I had to weigh up why watching the sexual inter-
action was so different to watching other aspects of the commercial transaction
and how observing sex would alter the parameters of the research? (Sanders,
2005: 209)
Researching those who are considered relatively powerless is not the only instance
that warrants specific ethical consideration. Elites, such as multi-national company
directors, and those who may be identifiable by their job titles also need to be pro-
tected.With ethnographic methods much of the ‘ethical stuff’ cannot be pre-empted,
so must be dealt with in situ,when you are there in the field,in the thick of the action.
Referring to the framework of rights and responsibilities usually provides the answer
to tricky situations, but you may have to work some solutions out for yourself.
BOX 4.5
Accountability
As researchers we are accountable to a range of audiences and each demand their own
ethical consideration. Think about accountability as a researcher to the following groups:
•
Your institution
•
Your supervisor
•
Your informants
•
Your gatekeepers
•
The wider research community
•
Yourself
Negotiating the Research Process
52
The role of research ethics committees
Traditionally, doctoral students have always discussed ethical issues with their
supervisor and at upgrade assessments to monitor what issues may arise and how
they should be handled. Now ethics have become a central part of the research
process in universities and research communities.When applying for funding, eth-
ical approval must be sought and usually passed through an internal panel called a
Research Ethics Committee. These are bureaucratic systems of checking that a
researcher has the legal issues covered, has designed appropriate ethical methodol-
ogy and has considered the setting and what specific risks may occur. In part, this
is like a risk assessment for respondents and the researcher, but it is also about the
reputation and integrity of the university. Living in a world of litigation, ethics is
becoming an important issue for university lawyers.There has been much criticism
of the introduction of bureaucracy and checking systems around ethics, mainly
because social science has traditionally been very good at performing ethically
sound research as there are substantive discipline guidelines. At worst, criticism
suggests that ethics committees, apart from taking a huge amount of time and
effort, are policing research methods and topics rather than just looking at ethical
issues.This means that ethics committees could squeeze out innovative research or
risky topics and populations as they are considered too problematic.
Research ethics committees essentially reinforce the guidelines that each disci-
pline has worked by for some time.The Social Research Association, established in
1978, produced the Respect Code of Practice for Socio-Economic Research (www.the-sra.
org.uk/ethicals/htm).This Code acts as ‘a voluntary code of practice covering the
conduct of socio-economic research in Europe’ which promotes three underlying
principles:
•
Upholding scientific standards.
•
Compliance with law.
•
Avoidance of social and personal harm.
Codes of practice for various social science and humanities disciplines are avail-
able from relevant professional bodies and associations that represent the discipline.
For instance, the following organisations have useful codes of ethical practice:
•
British Psychological Society: www.bps.org.uk
•
Social Policy Association: www.social-policy.com
•
British Sociological Association: www.britsoc.co.uk
•
British Educational Research Association: http://www.bera.ac.uk/
•
British Society of Criminology: www.britsoccrim.org/ethical.htm
The types of issues and complexities of ethics that all researchers need to consider
can be understood by the breadth of coverage in the Statement of Ethical Practice
for the British Sociological Association.This code covers the following areas:
Managing the Ethics of Academia
53
•
Professional integrity.
•
Relations with and responsibilities towards research participants.
•
Relationships with research participants.
•
Covert research.
•
Anonymity, privacy and confidentiality.
•
Relations with and responsibilities towards sponsors.
•
Clarifying obligations, roles and rights.
•
Pre-empting outcomes and negotiations about research.
•
Obligations to sponsors and funders during the research process.
As previously mentioned, researchers have legal responsibilities in relation to col-
lecting, storing and protecting data (see Box 4.6).
BOX 4.6
Research responsibilities for data protection
All researchers need to uphold their legal responsibilities for data protection. Conventions
among social science researchers include the following strategies for anonymising and
ethically storing personal information:
1
The act of collecting personal data needs to have a research rationale that is clearly
explained to any research participant.
2
Seek informed consent via explaining the rationale behind information collecting and
gaining permission to collect the data. Respondents reserve the right to decline this
request.
3
Asking about income, education, occupation or family details requires ethical consid-
erations as many may feel these issues are personal and private. Think about how
you ask for this information and your information needs.Will asking respondent to tick
an income range (i.e. £10,000–15,000 pa), education range or general occupation
category suffice?
4
Make a log, chart, file or some sort of master sheet of all the personal details about
each research respondent and research settings. Attach an anonymous label to each
data case and setting.
5
Anonymise all personal information throughout your data cases both in the body of
the data and the respondent details.
6
Make sure the log of personal details is only accessible to you or additional col-
leagues working on the research project. All personal information needs to be
securely stored, i.e. on a separate PC file that is password protected, or in a locked
drawer/filing cabinet.
7
Seek to protect the respondent’s integrity and anonymous status throughout data
analysis and writing up.
Negotiating the Research Process
54
Personal ethics in research practice
A lot of the emphasis in designing ethical research is on the safety and rights of the
respondent, ensuring that they come to no harm. However, the safety of the
researcher is also an important consideration across the research project such as when
accessing research participants,dealing with gatekeepers or conducting fieldwork.The
complex nature of ‘risk’ in research has been documented more frequently recently,
as often the risks are unforeseen and develop in situ when the research is taking place
in the field (Lee-Treweek and Linkogle, 2000).The personal impact of research, espe-
cially fieldwork, must be taken into consideration.You may need to think about your
safety and think about whether you are going to places that may be risky or put you
in danger. Emotional danger and emotions in research also need to be given consid-
eration. For instance, Sharon Elley recalls how her interview work with young
people about sex education programmes could involve emotionally and ethically
challenging interactions:
I vividly recall an interview where a seventeen-year-old disclosed rape at the age
of ten. Emotionally I felt stunned and horrified; professionally I felt ill-equipped to
deal with the moment. Ethically, I’d accounted for this but I was unsure of what to
do next. Ethical and professional guidelines flooded my mind as I asked myself
‘What am I supposed to do now?’ Do I ask her if she wants to discuss it; do I skirt
around it; can I deal with what she reveals? Notwithstanding, we have a ‘Duty of
Care’, responsibilities and obligations towards young people. So, tentatively I
asked her if she wanted to talk about it and she replied ‘No’. The interview contin-
ued but I felt subdued and there was a crawling in my stomach. Afterwards, I
passed the information on to the appropriate persons but I questioned whether in
doing so I was making the young woman relive past experiences again in order to
tick the appropriate boxes.Yet still I realise such procedures need to be in place to
protect others.
This highlights how there are ethical dilemmas that have to be confronted on the
spot in the field and dealt with as a real life issue and not just a potential consider-
ation in a research design paper. The ethical decisions have impacts on individuals
and good accounts of ‘tales in the field’ offer glimpses into what it is actually like
to do research.As researchers the personal and safety issues in relation to our field-
work are key consideration. Kate Williams recounts fear in the fieldwork process
Managing the Ethics of Academia
55
and highlights that safety procedures should be paramount to protect yourself
from harm:
As a female I felt particularly vulnerable when visiting people’s houses alone to
conduct interviews, and always left appropriate details with a member of my family.
Nonetheless, situations still occurred that caused me to feel threatened. For exam-
ple, I had to use my judgement on whether to continue when a sex worker that I
was interviewing told me that her violent pimp could return at any time. Although I
stayed on that occasion, I did turn down other potential fieldwork opportunities due
to personal safety fears. As much as we want the data, we have to do everything
possible to protect ourselves.
Ethics are important in research and as a student you will encounter them both
professionally and personally. In an age of ethical governance where research can be
constrained by the bureaucracy around checking what we are doing is legitimate, as
a student you will have ethics at the forefront of your thinking, planning and real life
experience in the field.
Key Points to Remember

Good practice will be a guiding principle of your research.

You will probably have to go through a formal ethics committee at university.

The main issues to consider are potential harms, confidentiality and informed
consent.

Researching vulnerable groups will pose specific ethical issues.

Certain methodologies, such as ethnography, may prove more complicated
than other methods, but do not be deterred.

It is important to think about your own safety.

Ethical issues cannot always be second-guessed – be prepared for the unex-
pected and to make decisions in the field.

Your discipline will have a useful code of practice to follow.

Part of your research training should include investigation of ethical standards
and approaches within your field of research.
Negotiating the Research Process
56
SUGGESTED READING
Denscombe, M. (2002) Ground Rules for Good Research: A 10 Point Guide
for Social Researchers. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Le Voi, M. (2002) ‘Responsibilities, rights and ethics’, in S. Potter (ed.), Doing
Postgraduate Research. London: Open University and Sage Publications.
pp. 133–153.
Mauthner, M., Birch, M., Jessop, J. and Miller, T. (eds) (2002) Ethics in
Qualitative Research. London: Sage.
Oliver, P. (2003) The Student’s Guide to Research Ethics. Maidenhead: Open
University Press.
Managing the Ethics of Academia
57
Chapter 5
What to do With your Data
What this Chapter Includes:

From data to findings

Types of data and data analysis

Preparing data transcripts and field notes

Labelling, recording, storing and archiving

Shall I use a software program?

Analytical strategies and coding your data

Moving towards overall research findings

Thinking through the claims you can make: issues of validity and reliability
From data to findings
A clear distinction between data collection and data analysis is difficult to maintain as
researchers can begin to interpret data as it is collected (hopefully capturing such
hunches and impressions in a research diary or log). However, data analysis refers to a
more concentrated and systematic period of analysing of your data, with the view to
generating avenues for further data collection or your overall research findings. The
process of data analysis involves making sense of your data in relation to your research
questions. Before considering some important stages and approaches, we need to
distinguish between types of data.
Types of data and data analysis
Data can be:
•
Numerical (e.g. numbers and measurements).
•
Textual (e.g. in written form such as documents; transcripts of individual or group inter-
views; observational field notes; diary entries or historical records).
•
Visual (e.g. such as video recordings; photos).
•
Audio (e.g. sound recordings; recorded conversations).
•
A mixture of any of the above.
These different types of data offer different ways of capturing the phenomena you
are investigating.They can be grouped into quantitative or qualitative forms of data,
with the former involving the generation of numerical data and the latter involving
interpretations using words, pictures or sounds. Data analysis approaches also involve
quantitative, qualitative or combined frameworks.
BOX 5.1
Examples of quantitative and qualitative approaches
Quantitative analysis can involve the production of:
•
Descriptive statistics on your data (i.e. variable frequency/averages).
•
Inferential statistics (i.e. variable significance/association significance).
•
Multivariate analysis (i.e. relationships between two or more variables).
Qualitative analysis also takes many forms including:
•
Interpretative thematic data analysis: generating themes from interview, visual or
audio data.
•
Framework analysis: a thematic approach that seeks to generate concepts from data
and a prior evidence base for applied policy research.
•
Grounded theory: an approach to generating conceptual frameworks from your data
rather than prior academic theory.
•
Life story approaches: analysing personal narratives and life stories using theories
and biographical frameworks.
•
Analysing biography and social context: Biographical Narrative Interpretative Method,
for example, seeks to generate a picture of life histories and social contexts.
•
Reflexive readings: autobiographical approaches seek to analyse the researcher’s
life experiences or input into the research process.
At the design phase of your study, we are hoping that you have already considered
your analytical approach and established a complementary connection between your
research questions, data collection and analysis methods and approach. Box 5.1 also
gives some further indications of approaches on which the suggested reading at the
end of this chapter provides more information (also see Chapter 2). Not having a
clear plan of how you propose to analyse your data runs the risk of being limited in
the kind of analysis you can do. Planning your analysis approach after data collection
increases the likelihood of being restricted to the kinds of analysis that suit the data
you have collected. For example, a qualitative researcher is unable to conduct a bio-
graphical life history approach to analysis if they have limited data on the respondent’s
life history; and a quantitative researcher will find it difficult to conduct particular
What to do With your Data
59
types of statistical analysis of their data if their questions or sampling method do not
fit the analysis approach. However, with many existing texts that detail particular
approaches, this chapter tends to refer students on to more specialist texts for more
detailed accounts and here considers some steps and strategies for moving through
your analysis in a more general way. The chapter begins with some experiential
reflections on getting started and then goes on to consider issues for analysis such as
planning your approach, preparing your data, indexing and coding, and establishing
relationships, patterns and findings.
Getting started, getting stuck and
pushing forward
Undertaking a PhD study will inevitably involve periods of uncertainty, difficulty
and doubt. A common sentiment at the beginning of the data analysis stage is an
overwhelming feeling of having a lot of data and wondering what to do with it, and
whether it will provide some illuminating answers to your questions. One of our
contributors, Joseph Burridge, undertook a study of media representations of Iraq.
He was all set to begin his PhD research at the end of September 2001 when the
World Trade Centre was struck earlier that month.This event changed the signifi-
cance of his project.Joseph then spent three years collecting a huge amount of news-
paper archive data:
My data collection began a fortnight before the official start of my PhD registration
(12th September 2001), and continued up until about a fortnight before my thesis
was submitted. The availability of masses of material can be viewed as either
extremely exciting or as potentially overwhelming – I constantly oscillated between
these two positions. In reality, I spent several hours each day collating and cate-
gorising media reports.
Several of our contributors found that they had under-estimated the time it would
take to analyse the data they collected. Harriet Churchill realised she had collected
more qualitative interview data than she was able to analyse, which contributed to a
delay in submission by six months. Due to time constraints, John Roberts decided to
drop an area of historical data archive material in his project, but was able to return
to analyse this at a later date. Often the time taken to ‘prepare’ your data for analysis
Negotiating the Research Process
60
such as with inputting data into software programs, can be grossly under-estimated.
Emily Tanner felt she had:
Under-estimated the amount of time it would take to prepare the (quantitative) data
for analysis. It took much more time than expected to spot the errors in data entry to
SPSS, to deal with missing data and to derive the variable for subsequent analysis.
Another concern in the early stages of data analysis was one of doubt and uncertainty
over whether ‘you have the right data or will find anything out’.This can sometimes be
even more the case in survey research, as you may not have read through your survey
responses until you begin analysis. In her quantitative study of maternal employment
outcomes, Emily Tanner was concerned about ‘whether I would find the relationships
that I was expecting or if my results will yield anything to write about’.With no scope
to further probe your participants’ responses in postal survey research, Sheelah Flatman
Watson was hugely concerned whether her ‘questions were right’or understood appro-
priately.She waited with ‘nervous anticipation’for her surveys to be returned and to find
out if ‘her questions were appropriate, and if there was enough scope for individual
comment in the open questions’ she had devised.
A further common challenge within the data analysis phase of a research project is
that of moving from a detailed picture of your data, perhaps aided by coding, sorting
and devising charts and tables of your overall data, towards some overall general
explanations and findings.Harriet Churchill discusses this stage of her thematic qual-
itative data analysis:
Trying to make connections across all the transcripts was extremely difficult. I
found it hard to move towards a more general picture as there seemed to be
exceptions to each overall explanation. It wasn’t until I started writing up, writing
papers and trying to explain the dominant themes in writing that I began to move
towards a more general picture of the data. I also had to drop many interesting
themes, and really focus on some particularly pertinent areas. Here I was con-
cerned about prematurely limiting my explanatory possibilities.
In moving from data collection towards data analysis you may feel:
•
Unsure if you have ‘enough’ of the ‘right’ data.
•
Unsure if you have ‘too much’ data.
What to do With your Data
61
•
Uncertain about how to get ‘started’.
•
Excited to establish the central findings from the data.
•
Unsure about the details of how to put your approach into practice.
•
Overwhelmed by the need to learn new data analysis software packages.
To get yourself started with data analysis, it may be worth spending some time
reflecting on what your concerns are and what you are expecting to find out,and turn-
ing these into questions and issues to think about further and seek advice on.Whether
studies employ a qualitative, quantitative or mixed methods approach; analysis requires
preparing the data for analysis, employing analytical strategies and moving towards
research findings.
Preparing data for analysis
There are a number of tasks involved in preparing your data for further analysis. Data
will need to be organised, labelled and stored in ways that are suitable to your purpose
and approach. For qualitative data, preparing your data may involve typing up field
notes, transcribing interviews, anonymising data and inputting data into a software
package. For quantitative data, also you will need to input data into a software package
alongside the cataloguing of survey responses, survey response rates and missing data
(numerically cataloguing how many surveys responses were received and how many
questions were answered in the appropriate way).As we have already highlighted, the
time required for these activities,which often overlap between data collection and data
analysis,is often under-estimated.However,ultimately thorough and thoughtful prepa-
ration of your data will potentially save you some stress and time later on, as you will
be able to manage your data in an efficient way.We will now turn to consider four key
aspects of data preparation: transcribing qualitative data; labelling and storing data; util-
ising software packages and preparing quantitative data for analysis. All four of these
activities may be carried out as you collect your data and further as a distinctive pre-
data analysis stage in your research project.
Preparing data transcripts and field notes
Transcribing a research interview or recorded field notes generates a typed verbatim
transcript of the interview or observed interactions and activities.This can help the
researcher to analyse interview or observational data in some depth. However, in
some studies time constraints may mean that interviews or field conversations are
purposefully more partially transcribed, selectively recording data that is deemed to
be particularly relevant to the research topic and questions. Alternatively there are
very detailed approaches to the transcription of qualitative data that seek to record a
vast array of non-verbal and detailed verbal communication. Your transcription
approach will really depend on what type of analysis you wish to pursue, your
timescale and the resources available.
Negotiating the Research Process
62
BOX 5.2
Some commonly used transcription conventions
Italics or bold or underline = emphasises a word
( … ) = pauses 
= for simultaneous speech 
CAPS = loud sounding words
(??) = words that the transcriber cannot hear
/ = a rising intonation
full stops, commas and paragraphs at points that seem to indicate these kinds of pauses
and endings.
As you type out your interview be generous with your spacing and layout to leave room
to write in notes/label segments of text.
Labelling, record keeping, storing and archiving
Good practice here may be to devise a ‘data record sheet’ for each interview, field visit,
survey participant or archived raw data; and to do this before you collect any data so
that the details can be filled in as your data comes in.This sheet can include personal
details, the date that data was collected, an anonymous code referring to each partici-
pant or case and immediate impressions.Alternatively the details can be recorded dur-
ing data collection in note form and transferred onto a data record sheet in these
preliminary stages of data analysis (see Chapter 3 for researcher responsibilities).
Joseph Burridge found it took some time to devise an appropriate system of
storing newspaper reports for his study. He ended up devising a manual archiving
system, with newspaper reports filed according to a thematic main story approach.
Alternatively a number of software packages now exist – although we cannot strongly
enough recommend that regular printed out hard copies and back up files of all data
files are also securely kept throughout the data analysis phase.
Shall I use a software program? 
There are many software programs designed to aid quantitative and qualitative data
organisation and analysis. An example of a quantitative program is SPSS (Statistical
Package for the Social Sciences) and qualitative ones (called Computer Assisted
Qualitative Data Analysis Systems – CAQDAS) are packages such as Atlas.ti,NUD*IST,
NVivo 7, Ethnograph and Hypersoft. SPSS is used for the manipulation of numerical
data and can compute a number of descriptive, inferential and multivariate statistical
tests. CAQDAS can offer a range of indexing, retrieval, organising and note-taking
facilities that can be used by a researcher to enhance their data organisation and analy-
sis.Both quantitative and qualitative packages are aids to cataloguing,storing and analysing
large amounts of data that would be much more time-consuming and cumbersome to
What to do With your Data
63
work with manually.SPSS offers massive scope in computing statistical formulae across
large data sets in a matter of seconds. CAQDAS also offer more efficient and accessi-
ble ways of retrieving and storing qualitative data, as well as offering hyperlink facili-
ties so that different sections of data within or across transcripts or even across different
types of data such as photos, video clips, background research notes and field notes can
be linked within the program. If these questions appear to be bewildering, you may
need to spend some time familiarising yourself with the software packages available for
your data analysis purposes. It is common for students to need to supplement their
research methods training with more specialist training in particular software packages.
Again this requires time and effort. Sheelah Flatman Watson offers an encouraging
example of taking the opportunity to enhance her professional development as a
researcher when she took on to learn how to use SPSS and NUD*IST6 during her
mixed method research study:
My computer skills were limited. I had a very basic understanding of SPSS. I knew
what the package had potential to do having attended a methods class, but I had
never applied the learning. My first supervisor was not familiar with SPSS but at
least my second supervisor, an SPSS user, helped with how to set up my data.
But mainly I had to learn quickly, and decide on an appropriate coding frame. This
required hours of trial and error.
BOX 5.3
The use of SPSS and CAQDAS needs to be researcher and
methodologically driven
Software programs do not do your analysis for you but operate a number of pre-
programmed functions that can support your analysis in particular ways. You will
need to have a clear and appropriate rationale for utilising a program and its func-
tions and be aware of the possibilities and limitations built into it. For those using
SPSS, familiarity with the rationales underpinning a variety of statistical tests is
required as is careful inputting of data in order to make sure the raw data is correct
before the software conducts any tests. The different CAQDAS available are under-
pinned by different explanatory logics. In considering the use of software for your
analysis ask yourself:
•
Am I clear what the software can do? For example, some CAQDAS claim ‘theory
building capacities’. But it is the researcher who decides what codes are devised,
what functions are operated and what relationships or patterns are significant. For 
Negotiating the Research Process
64
(Continued)
SPSS users, while the programme will work with the data inputted, it is the role of the
researcher to ensure the data has been inputted into the program correctly.
•
What is useful about the program in the context of your research project and approach?
For example, will you use software as a means of storing, indexing or manipulating
data? Or all three?
•
What information can I get about the epistemological and explanatory logic of the
software from the published information, demonstration guides and formal/informal
electronic networks?
•
Does the software suit my IT, time and training resources?
•
What are my reasons for not using CAQDAS? Am I being technology phobic?
Analytical strategies
Coding your data
Coding involves labelling and categorising your data. For qualitative data, codes
represent ways of categorising chunks of data and offer a shorthand label for larger
sections of data. For quantitative data, codes can represent different types of responses
to social survey research questions.The codes chosen can be derived from concep-
tual frameworks relevant to your research question and area, devised ‘a priori’ at the
stage of questionnaire design so that answers to questions already have a code
attached to them and the task of data analysis involves numerically investigating the
coded results. Codes can also be attached to data after data collection, as a researcher
devises a label to categorise open-ended responses to a questionnaire or sections of
transcript data. Overall, there are three types of codes:
•
A priori coding: codes that refer to concepts generated from the wider research and
theoretical debates related to your research topic.
•
Open coding: codes representing your interpretation of respondents’ viewpoints.
•
In-vivo coding: codes generated using terms that are used by respondents
themselves.
Sheelah Flatman Watson describes devising the majority of her codes prior to
administering her questionnaire, all of which were recorded in a ‘codebook’. Her
questionnaire design involved using closed questions (where a respondent chooses
between different answers already set out) and open-ended survey questions (where
a respondent can write out their own answers using their own words). Some of her
‘codes’, therefore, were developed through open and in-vivo coding:
What to do With your Data
65
I drafted a codebook in the survey design phase, with codes emerging from the
possible range of answers given to the questions I had devised. In the data analysis
phase I then had to re-develop this coding system to incorporate the open-ended
survey answers. This required similar considerations but in relation to different
sources. For the a priori coding, I referred to issues raised in the literature and prac-
titioner debates.For the open coding I was concerned – Were the codes a fair and rea-
sonable description of the meanings within the data? It was a very time-consuming
exercise requiring patient readings of each contribution to decipher appropriate
categorisation.
Qualitative approaches often involve developing codes inductively. Here codes
represent central aspects of a sentence, phrase or a few sentences within a transcript.
Codes can be developed in relation to respondents or observational settings viewed
as ‘cases’ or as themes emerging across cases or transcripts. Strategies towards this
process include: generating an initial set of codes, re-working coding towards a cod-
ing framework, coding your data and analysing relationships between coded data.
Initially, researchers often take a cross section of their transcripts or documents, read
through the transcripts and begin to label sections of the data using open, in-vivo or
some a priori derived codes. If coding is performed manually on printed out docu-
ments, different coloured highlighter pens can be used to denote different codes.
However, beyond some fairly simple coding this task may become very cumbersome
and CAQDAS have facilities for highlighting and labelling text as ‘open or in-vivo
codes’. Other concepts derived from your reading may seem pertinent to what is
being portrayed in your interviews and these can also become codes. Harriet
Churchill offers an example of how she generated some codes related to ‘coping’ in
her research on parenting:
Many interviewees discussed their commitment to coping; their experiences of
coping and their difficulties. However, the code of ‘coping’ is too broad and so I
tried to devise codes that demonstrate the different facets of coping. The codes
that emerged were: coping strategy, services and coping, social support and cop-
ing and good motherhood and coping. Some of these codes were generated from
the data but others were derived from conceptual debates in the literature around
parenting on a low income. Once the codes were devised and all the data indexed,
all the data coded as related to coping could be analysed. Codes were subse-
quently refined and further questions were asked about coping.
Negotiating the Research Process
66
As you read through your data, keep asking yourself: what issue is being discussed
here; what perspective or concern is the interviewee presenting? Codes should also
be clearly defined (CAQDAS have in-built logs for this purpose), mutually exclusive
and can be categorised according to overall theme with sub-themes/categories.After
reading a selection of transcripts, you will probably already have a long list of codes
and categories. It will be worth examining this list once it gets beyond twenty or so
codes and thinking about overlaps and connections between codes. Further subse-
quent rounds of reading transcripts, applying and modifying codes and thinking
through the connections between codes can then be performed in order to generate
a coding framework. Once you have developed all your codes and these have been
arranged into a coding framework, you can then index all your data using these
codes.This organises and categories your data into what Mason has called ‘bags of
data’ which can then be analysed further towards deriving explanations for your
research questions (Mason, 2002).
Many contributors found coding their data surprisingly time-consuming, demanding
much concentration,‘boring and repetitive’ as well as exciting and challenging. One
contributor felt they ‘paid more attention to some transcripts than others because of
the time of day they were coded, their interest in the topics and their mood at the
time’. Breaking up periods of indexing with refining codes, or doing other activities
such as checking recent journals in your area for new publications or inputting your
bibliography may help.
Moving towards overall research findings
Once your data are categorised into codes, analysis moves towards focusing on explain-
ing these themes and deciphering patterns and relationships between them in ways that
return to providing some answers to your research questions. A line of argument is
hence developed, as you offer an overall interpretation of your data. Many of our con-
tributors refer to some helpful activities that aided the construction of an argument.
Framework analysis, or other qualitative thematic approaches, often utilise tables,
diagrams,charts or matrices to facilitate examining cases or themes.Some contributors
also found writing up their data analysis in the form of thematic papers helped them to
think through their overall research questions, theoretical frameworks and the patterns
emerging in their data. Both of these strategies helped students to investigate overall
patterns in their data. Sheelah Flatman Watson also found that writing a paper on her
quantitative data analysis helped her to arrive at some overall findings:
Writing a paper was a wonderful way to focus the data. I developed a series of
descriptive statistics that wove a path across phase one, the service provider survey
data, and followed these findings with comparative findings from phase two, the 
(Continued)
What to do With your Data
67
(Continued)
service client survey data. The paper had to be submitted by a particular date and
the pressure was on to decide on the salient points to be addressed that would
give a coherent picture of the data. The paper got written and my data were no
longer data but research findings. I now felt I had an idea how I would approach
the remainder of the data.
The process of developing an argument is often conveyed as an iterative process
of moving between interpretation, data and theoretical explanations.This involves a
continual search for evidence and counter-evidence when devising explanations.
Critically assessing your developing interpretations against your data evidence and
thinking about alternative explanations is a crucial aspect of this process.
Thinking about the claims you can make: issues of
validity and reliability
When arriving at your overall research findings you will be engaging with complex
issues of validity and reliability. A major debate in qualitative research fields has been
recognition of the interpretative nature of research, and the need to provide evidence
of how you arrived at your conclusions from the data you generated via a transparent
account of your research design, data collection and analysis and interpretation logics,
including perhaps a reflexive account of the role of the researcher in the interpretative
process. Making claims in quantitative research also involves interpretation. Quantitative
research can attempt to extrapolate patterns from representative samples of wider pop-
ulations. Emily Tanner, however, felt limited in the generalisation claims she could
make from her research approach, although by the end of her study she was also aware
of the significant contribution her findings could make to her research area:
I’ve learned that it is very difficult to design a quantitative study based on new data
that uses random probability sampling methods and has a sample size large enough
to yield high quality reliable data. I did generate results, but since my sample was
based on convenience methods, I could not extrapolate my sample estimates to the
wider population. Also I could not make reliable arguments about causation, only
relationships of association. To identify cause and effect requires a multiple stage
design, which is often unfeasible within the funding and time constraints of a doc-
toral thesis.
Negotiating the Research Process
68
You will need to ask yourself about the possibilities of your research approach and
analysis for the types of claims you can make, issues on which the suggested reading
below offers further deliberation.
Key Points to Remember

You will need to think about your analysis approach during the research design
phase and ensure a logical ‘fit’ between your research questions, approach,
data type and claims.

Preparation for data analysis involves labelling, sorting, archiving, transcribing,
anonymising data and inputting data into software programs.

Consider using software packages.

Allow plenty of time for data analysis.

Find out about your ethical and data protection responsibilities.

Data analysis can involve coding, indexing and generating explanations.

Devising charts, tables and matrices may enhance your overview of your data
and the relationships between codes.

Writing thematic papers may help develop your argument.

Think about what type of claims your research design and approach allow for.
SUGGESTED READING
Cameron, D. (2001) Working with Spoken Discourse. London: Sage.
Field, A. (2005) Discovering Statistics Using SPSS. London: Sage.
Fielding, J. and Gilbert, N. (2006) Understanding Social Statistics. London:
Sage.
Fielding, N.G. and Lee, R.M. (1998) Computer Analysis and Qualitative
Research. London: Sage.
Mason, J. (2002) Qualitative Researching, 2nd edn. London: Sage.
What to do With your Data
69
Part II
Writing, Publishing and 
Networking
This second section of the book deals directly with the importance of writing,
publishing and networking, which are three core elements of the PhD success.
Much of your energies will be spent fathoming out and extending your skills in
these areas. Chapter 6 examines writing as both a process and a product that can
be started as early as possible. Asking you questions about your own writing style
and hang-ups, this chapter provides strategies for managing the writing process,
developing an argument and using different styles of writing. Not shying away
from acknowledging that many people find writing difficult, we discuss ‘writer’s
block’ and think about strategies for moving forward. Chapter 7 is closely linked to
the writing process as it highlights the relevance of writing for publication whilst
doing a PhD and the steps to take to get a paper published. There are many bene-
fits to timetabling publishing into your work schedule and getting familiar with the
peer review process. Much of this can mean learning to deal with criticisms effec-
tively and not taking the comments from reviewers too personally. 
Becoming part of the academic culture and circles will mean that networking,
whether you love or loathe it, will become an important task. Chapter 8 looks at
how and why networking with both peers at your institution as well as others on a
regional, national or international scale will be important for your own progress.
Thinking about your place in the research community, we highlight how our con-
tributors often found networking an anxious or time-consuming activity that
needed effort. We offer suggestions regarding opportunities and networking struc-
tures that are easy to enter and show you how these can be fruitful and often an
entertaining part of the job.
We wanted to highlight that doing a PhD is not easy and that deadlines infiltrate the
process and can often be a source of anxiety, stress and produce feelings of failure. In
Chapter 9 we explain how deadlines are part of the timetabling which will keep you on
track and get you completed within the set time. Yet here our contributors highlight
what can go wrong with deadlines and how months can slip away and the overall pro-
ject can simply become unmanageable. We discuss realistic time management strate-
gies as well as offer some solidarity from those who have missed the deadline, hopefully
to show that things can turn around. The concluding chapter of this section looks
towards the end of the PhD process by examining the viva and what happens beyond
the PhD. This chapter offers a realistic look at the examination process, often shrouded
in mystery and scary legends about the wrath of the examiners, and highlights that the
viva is only the beginning of the end. We offer some tips on preparing both long and
short term as well as immediately prior to the viva. Thinking about the afterwards stage
we take contributors’ experiences to examine what needs to be done about getting a
job before the viva arrives. Here we offer some useful tips about career planning for
those thinking about working in academia or other sectors unrelated to academia.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
72
Chapter 6
Writing Up and Writer’s Block
What this Chapter Includes:

Writing as activity, process and product

It is never too early to start writing

Managing the writing process

Writing to aid argument development

Free-writing and generative writing

Presenting and describing your research

Writing up your thesis

Writer’s block – strategies for moving on
Writing as activity, process and product
Writing can play a central role in your PhD research in four key ways:
•
As an activity that aids the formulation of your ideas and expresses them in written form.
•
As a part of the creative and analytical thinking process.
•
As the central activity that occurs during the production of your final product – the PhD
thesis.
•
As a major form of assessment.
Thinking about writing in these four ways – as an activity, analytical process, product
and form of assessment – encourages the research student to consider a range of issues.
First, as an expressive activity, writing involves the act of conveying ideas, descriptions
and explanations in the written word form using appropriate grammatical conven-
tions.The activity of writing gets us thinking about what writing consists of and our
own perceptions of our writing style, skills, strengths and weaknesses, as well as the
similarities and differences between the written word and alternative forms of expres-
sive activities and language use. PhD students will commence their studies with a
wide range of experiences and linguistic backgrounds.As an activity, writing becomes
a form of linguistic expression to be practised, personalised and mastered over time.
As an expressive activity, writing is also an aid for creative and analytical thinking.
Murray (2002) and Wellington et al. (2005) draw on the work of Elbow (1973) who
produced a critique of the traditional view of the PhD process as ending with a
period of ‘writing up’.This phrase suggests that students ‘write up’ their research as
the final stage of undertaking research and after they have formulated their argu-
ment.While this approach may work for some PhD students, for others such a view
may actually lead to delaying writing until you ‘know what you have to say’ and
being harshly critical of early attempts at ‘writing up’. Elbow wonders if students
would ever start writing or move past a first draft if they expected merely to ‘write
their argument/thesis up’. Rather, we can view writing as more of an ongoing
process – as a process integral to generating your ideas and arguments.
For PhD research, writing is also about producing a very tangible product – your
thesis – which forms a major part of the assessment process.In order to produce your
thesis, you will spend much time doing the activity of writing and using writing as
part of progressing your ideas towards the final thesis.You will need to be clear about
what is required in writing a thesis and the assessment criteria. However, if you find
writing, as an activity, process or product, challenging – you are not alone.There is
ample evidence that many PhD students, as well as more established academics, often
find themselves suffering from a shaky confidence in their writing (see Back, 2004;
Murray, 2004;Wellington et al., 2005).
It is never too early to start writing
Several contributors described having difficulties getting started with writing up.
Many underlying issues seemed to influence these experiences such as feeling unpre-
pared, too pressed for time or not confident enough to get started:
I think I put off writing until the third year of my PhD. Although I read a lot, noted
down ideas and arguments in the literature and wrote conference papers on spe-
cific aspects of my research – I did not pull this all together into an over-arching
written piece early enough. I assumed I would put it all together later on in my final
‘writing up year’. Looking back I didn’t push myself to move towards some overall
argument by writing out how my literature, design, data analysis and developing
findings fitted together. In the last year, writing up felt so difficult, I felt I had a lot
to say but couldn’t put it across in a clear way for quite some time. I think a lot of
those difficulties were from not doing enough writing earlier on.
[Harriet Churchill]
With hindsight, Harriet feels she didn’t do enough ‘argumentative’ writing in the
first two years of her thesis. Harriet also felt unconfident about writing, uncertain if
Writing, Publishing and Networking
74
she had a clear idea of what she wanted to portray and anxious about whether she
had analysed her data enough to start writing up.All of these concerns in effect led
to delays in writing. Rather, Murray recommends that writing down your ideas
should occur from the outset of your research.There are many ways you can utilise
different ways of writing as a means of developing ideas and confidence.
BOX 6.1
Early on you could write about:
•
What you are interested in and what led you to these research interests.
•
Your initial ideas, reading and personal experiences in relation to your research area.
•
Your research questions and what you think you might find out.
•
Your methodological approach.
Martin Smith discusses the importance of writing as early as possible:
Once you start your PhD, start writing straight away and continue to write. Even if
you’re not satisfied with what you’ve written and know you’ll have to change it later,
you will feel more confident in your ability to write, and also feel a sense of accom-
plishment. It will also help to prevent writer’s block, which is often caused by keep-
ing too many ideas in the head and not getting each one down on paper.
John Roberts describes his early writing as consisting of research methods essays
and projects:
Much of what I originally wrote in early pieces of coursework from the first year of my
PhD ended up in my methodology chapter. On reflection this taught me a valuable
lesson – much of what you write throughout your PhD will be of use somewhere
further down the line even if initially it does not look to be the case or even if it does
not end up in your final PhD draft. These pieces of writing can be used later on in
conference papers, articles and book chapters.The rule to adhere to here is never
throw away anything you write.
Writing Up and Writer’s Block
75
Managing the writing process
During your PhD research you have the opportunity to develop as a regular, skilled
and productive writer.The independent and analytical nature of undertaking a PhD
will require developing an aptitude for persistence in progressing and focusing your
analysis via writing. Common suggestions for taking a proactive approach towards
your writing development are listed in Box 6.2.
BOX 6.2
Managing the writing-up process
•
Boice (1994) suggests writing at the same time each day or on the same day each
week to get into the habit of regular writing.
•
Don’t wait until you have a block of time to start writing a paper or a chapter – it may
never arrive!
•
Devise a timetable for writing. Mark out important short-term and long-term mile-
stones, i.e. research proposal deadline, first year progress report and so on. Set
yourself weekly and daily goals that fit in with these longer-term objectives.
•
Monitor and time your writing production over an hour/day/week or month. Get to
know what your writing output is and your writing speed. This information and aware-
ness will help you to make your targets specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and
time-scaled (SMART) (Murray, 2002: 21).
•
Define a clear purpose to your writing task, i.e.‘I will write for 2 hours every week day
or I will define my research topic in 1,000 words’.
•
Discuss writing explicitly with your supervisor and gain feedback on the content, style
and grammatical standard (peers can also provide useful feedback).
•
Think about your writing habits and approach. Are there any areas in which you can
gain further training or support?
•
Find out about any writing resources, courses or Web-based support for grammar,
punctuation, academic writing or writing for other purposes.
•
Find out if your university offers a bibliography software package such as Endnote.
Writing as an aid to argument development
This section considers some suggestions for writing as a way of generating ideas
and stimulating your thinking. Suggestions from our contributors included the use
of prompts, planning and writing thematic papers. For example, Harriet Churchill
describes how she would begin a writing session by gathering her thoughts
together:
Writing, Publishing and Networking
76
I would start a writing session in several ways. First, I might re-read something I
had written previously and then continue to follow up the ideas. Secondly, I would
list out some thoughts and then organise them into some sort of plan or structure
for writing. Other times I would just free-write for a while.
To get you started in writing up your methodology or working on an aspect of
your data analysis, you could prompt yourself with questions or provocative state-
ments.The aim of writing from prompts is to produce short, focused pieces of writing
in your own words as a means of accessing your understanding and viewpoints in
preparation for longer pieces of writing. Such an approach can also help with writ-
ing up your analysis of a journal article, book or body of literature.
Free-writing and generative writing
These approaches to writing can be helpful in getting you started with writing a new
chapter or in moving from thematic analysis towards building an argument.The key
idea is to write without stopping or editing for a short length of time as a means of
getting some ideas down, akin to ‘brainstorming’. Free-writing involves writing for
five or ten minutes without a prescribed structure (Murray,2002).You write non-stop
in sentences on whatever you want to write about and even moving between several
topics if that occurs. Generally this provides a ‘freedom’ to express yourself without
any judgement about the quality of your writing.This is not writing for an external
audience,hence the term ‘free-writing’.The uses of free-writing can be to warm you
up for writing, to identify key themes and topics, to develop a writing habit, to clar-
ify your thoughts, to express your personal thoughts and understandings, to free your
writing from immediate editing and to pull thoughts together at any point in the
writing process. The exercise will not produce those carefully structured chapters
necessary for your final thesis but may get some of your ideas on paper and help you
to see what you think about the issues. Generative writing is similar to free-writing
in that you write non-stop in sentences for a specific period of time, but you focus
on a particular topic and allow others to comment on it. So the key idea is not to
edit your work until you have written out a full page or paragraph on a particular
issue or topic.
Presenting and describing quantitative data
Writing up PhD research not only entails words but also numbers and numerical
data. If you have collected data that is of a quantifiable nature then learning how to
describe and present information using quantitative methods will be something you
Writing Up and Writer’s Block
77
are likely to receive specific training on.This section will just briefly re-cap on some
of the basics regarding presenting numerical data.
•
The general rule of thumb is that the most suitable method of displaying data sets is by
using the simplest graphical presentation.
•
With large data sets the first job is to summarise or put it into a meaningful order.
•
Deciding on how to present data pictorially through different charts and tables is an
important decision that can assist or detract from understanding your argument.
•
Dot plots are best for small numbers where there is no frequency.
•
Bar and pie charts represent nominal and ordinal data.
•
Bar and line charts represent ratio and interval data.
•
Histograms represent ratio or interval data that is discrete data with a frequency.
•
A cumulative frequency graph is useful for open class intervals.
•
Time series graphs can measure an attribute over time.
(adapted from Curnock (1996) Quantitative Methods in Business. Cheltenham: Stanley
Thornes)
Writing thematic working papers
John Roberts found it useful to write thematic working papers as a means of devel-
oping an interpretation of his data:
I faced the problem of integrating my primary data with my theoretical literature. To
be honest, I found this to be the biggest obstacle in finishing my PhD because I
had so much data. At this point I felt that the most useful exercise for me to under-
take would be to write up as much of the historical material as I could. By focus-
ing on writing up just one section of my data – I was able slowly to piece together
the emergence of Speaker’s Corner in Hyde Park, London – the object of enquiry
of my PhD.
Focusing on writing about one particular set of issues, type of data or thematic
consideration may help you to focus your thesis, gain valuable feedback and even
begin to draft an article suitable for publication (see Chapter 7).
Writing up your thesis
It is worth finding out about the regulations and conventions associated with a social
science doctoral thesis as early as possible. At the beginning of the research writing
Writing, Publishing and Networking
78
up your thesis may seem like a long way off, but getting an impression of what is
expected and what a thesis looks like and reads like may help to gain a realistic
impression.
•
Read the doctorate submission regulations produced by your host university. Check
details of word length, assessment criteria, assessment procedure and essential con-
tent, i.e. What should be on the title page? What chapters are stipulated?
•
Ask your supervisor and any other senior academics to suggest examples of a ‘good’
thesis for you to look at. Ask for their opinion of why the thesis was ‘good’. All theses
submitted are also available via your university library/thesis database.
•
Review the National Committee for Postgraduates and Quality Assurance Agency
documents on good practice and thesis assessment.
•
Ask any peers that have recently submitted about the assessment process and their
experiences of producing their thesis.
Producing the thesis: working on aspects of global planning
A thesis can be viewed as a ‘defended integrated argument’ that builds on theoretical
or empirical work in a particular research area.The argument makes a claim that is
placed in the context of other possible counter-claims and ongoing claims by other
researchers and authors in the field. In developing your thesis, writing while thinking
about ‘global planning’will be important.Global planning refers to the bigger picture –
your overall questions, argument, audience, purpose and structure. In writing up your
thesis,you will need to think about these global aspects and seek a coherent and appro-
priate thesis for your task and audience. Important questions to ask are:
•
What previous work has been done in this area? What are the key arguments and focus
of inquiry?
•
How does your work relate to this previous work? What do you intend to contribute?
•
What is your research question? How similar and different are your central questions
to previous work?
•
What have you done in your research? What were the stages of your research? Why
did you do what you did? And why in that order?
•
How did you go about answering your questions?
•
What methods and approaches did you use?
•
What have you found out? How do your findings add to the previous work? 
•
What do your findings mean? Do they raise any new questions or refine existing
concepts? What further research do you propose?
•
Who is my audience? What do I know about them? How should I write appropriately for
the audience?
Sheelah Flatman Watson found writing conference papers helped her to be disci-
plined in her writing with tight deadlines to meet. Planning such a step-by-step
Writing Up and Writer’s Block
79
approach towards a final thesis may help in establishing and getting past important
milestones on the way through writing up your thesis:
Writing a conference paper meant that the pressure was on to decide on the
salient points to be addressed that would serve the respondent community well
and give a coherent picture of the research. My supervisor reviewed and critiqued
the paper. After this presentation, I was then invited to prepare a plenary paper for
a forthcoming international conference, three weeks away. Again, engaging the
data to produce a follow on paper guided the research further. Having deadlines
to meet for the paper made decision-making purposeful within a limited timeframe.
Questions from the audience helped me refine my arguments.
Working on the specifics of each chapter
As well as thinking about the ‘global’ picture, you will need to think about the spe-
cific contribution each paragraph, page and chapter makes to the overall thesis. In
writing your chapters you can use generative writing and free-writing to get some
ideas out.Also you may want to plan out your ideas in a diagram or in a list.Try not
to edit too excessively at the beginning – try to get at least a page or two down first.
I would often start a session of writing by editing the paragraphs and pages I had
already written. In hindsight I realised I could spend half a day doing this as I pre-
ciously thought through each sentence trying to get it totally right. I then tended to
run up against a deadline before I had completed a first draft of a chapter or paper.
The problem then was that I had little time left for re-drafting and I found it hard to
let go of paragraphs I had spent so long working on.
[Harriet Churchill]
Think about the flow of a chapter.Most chapters require an overall introduction let-
ting the reader know what issues and areas will be covered. Use sub-headings to indi-
cate how the overall area will be discussed via a number of more specific discussions.
Signpost the reader along the way with reminders of what you have covered so far,
where you are heading and what relationship your specific point has to the overall
chapter and thesis.Allow plenty of time for editing. During the editing process think
about the ‘flow’ of your ideas, grammatical accuracy and the clarity of expression.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
80
Writer's block and strategies for moving on
‘Writer’s block’ is a general term used to describe the feeling of being stuck in your
writing. Many contributors described having ‘bad writing days’, feeling ‘unable to
write’ or being very dissatisfied by their ‘written work’. Indeed such days appear
common among all writers, no matter the level of experience or subject.The bad
writing days could be the ones where you sit at your computer, get easily distracted,
feel negative about the quality of your writing or spend all day writing one para-
graph. John Roberts describes writer’s block as emerging from uncertainty about the
connections between two aspects of his data:
I had been experiencing some difficulty about how I was going to integrate my
ethnographic data with both my theoretical and historical data. In many respects
this is where I had encountered what might be thought of as writer’s block. I had
difficulty in thinking through how all of my ethnographic material could be used in
a coherent manner with what I had now written.The solution, however, was a quick
and easy one. I realised that I had already written more than enough words for the
PhD. I thereby decided not to include the ethnography but to try to return to it after
my PhD viva by writing separate papers on it.
BOX 6.3
Overcoming writer’s block
•
Ask yourself whether you are suffering from writer’s block. Is your writing moving
forward slowly? Do you feel demoralised or confused? Are you bored? Are you being
overly critical when judging your earlier writing?
•
Try free-writing or generative writing about your thesis in general or a chapter or issue
just to get some writing done.
•
Try to express your ideas verbally (record this if possible) or visually in a diagram
before sitting down to write.
•
Re-read your previous writing.
•
Take a break, go for a walk, leave your paper for a few days, work on something such
as your bibliography or start on another chapter.
•
Break your writing sessions up and schedule some rewards for any small or large
achievements, e.g. an afternoon or day off for each chapter completed.
•
Develop a regular habit of writing.
Writing Up and Writer’s Block
81
Key Points to Remember

Writing forms a central part of your thesis production but can also be an aid
to analytical and creative thinking and help develop your expressive skills.

Think about how you see yourself as a writer. How do you feel about acade-
mic writing for your doctorate?

Start writing as early as possible and try to develop a regular habit of writing.

Use writing to stimulate ideas through the use of free-writing or generative
writing.

Manage the writing process – set yourself long-term and short-term goals.

Seek advice on availability and the use of a bibliographic software package.

Think about writing short thematic papers to aid argument development.

Think about capitalising on your writing – can you turn any thematic papers
into journal articles?

Find out about the conventions and expectations for your thesis structure and
content.

In writing up your thesis, think about the global picture (argument and message)
and the structure/specific contribution of each chapter.

Seek advice and feedback on your writing.

Allow for plenty of time for re-drafting.
SUGGESTED READING
Brause, R.S. (2000) Writing Your Doctoral Dissertation: Invisible Rules for
Success. London: Falmer.
Dunleavy, P. (2003) Authoring a PhD Thesis: How to Plan, Draft, Write and
Finish a Doctoral Dissertation. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Elliot, R. and Lawler, G. (2006) Your PhD Thesis: How to Plan, Draft, Revise
and Edit Your Thesis. London: Studymates.
Murray, R. (2002) How to Write a Thesis. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Thody, A. (2006) Writing and Presenting Research. London: Sage.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
82
Chapter 7
Papers and Publishing
This Chapter Includes:

The place of publishing in the lifecourse of the doctorate

The options of where to publish and how to decide the best readership

The benefits of getting your work published early

A brief overview of the publication process for journals

How to deal with challenging remarks and turn criticism into a successful
publication

The link between publishing, networking and presenting at conferences
Why the rush?
Increasingly, writing for publication as part of the PhD process is becoming a necessity
as the competition for academic jobs tightens and the weight given to peer reviewed
publications remains significant since the introduction of the Research Assessment
Exercise.Whatever form academic assessment takes in the future, those interested in a
research or academic career must take publishing seriously from an early stage.In addi-
tion, an integral part of working towards a doctorate is presenting your work to oth-
ers, whether this be peers in postgraduate workshops, your mentor in supervision
sessions, or an internal panel at various ‘upgrade’ stages. Publishing a piece of written
work is the final stage of this process of presenting your findings, arguments, theories
and methodological reflections to the wider academic community. As Becker (2004:
143) remarks,some of the reasons to go for publication include extending your writing
skills, but getting your work published can also be a great motivator.
Traditional academic cultures did not usually encourage students to seek publication.
This has changed significantly over the past decade as publication has been the
benchmark through which individuals are judged. This chapter explores why you
should get involved with publishing before you have been given the golden seal of
approval through doctorate success.This can be answered by thinking about content,
confidence, criticisms and careers.
Content
In terms of content, hopefully you already have interesting things to say before you
submit the thesis and are enthusiastic to report what you have found. Many of the
contributors described now they siphoned off specific and discrete research findings
from their PhD and prepared them for a journal article both before and after
submitting the thesis.
Even if you can get to the stage where you can write a coherent paper, there
will still be doubts about entering the publishing world. Jonny Burnett expresses
some typical doubts when he describes his thinking about writing for publication
in his first year: ‘Although ideas were certainly there, they were accompanied by
reservations regarding their validity, and whether I had the ability to structure and
present them coherently.’ You need to be sure that you have something that is
worthwhile to say, that it is not a repetition of knowledge already out there and
that your information is accurate and thorough. For example, the basic tenets of
the piece must contribute to moving a debate forward, reporting new findings,
addressing current policy issues or dealing with a contemporary event. Assessing
whether your paper contributes to knowledge is a matter for your own judgement
and asking your supervisors. As we will discuss, the peer reviewers will also have
plenty to say about originality.
Confidence
Dipping your toe in the world of peer review is a daunting experience and one of
the main barriers is normally confidence. Doug Morrisson reflects on this:‘The time
to start thinking about publishing is highly individualistic … . I was initially put off
by lack of confidence, fear of criticism and concerns about originality.’You can only
gain confidence by going through the process, so don’t let this be the reason for delay.
One way to build confidence is by doing your homework in terms of checking out
potential journals. Becker (2004: 145) summarises:‘Each journal has its own bias in
terms of the type of article in which it is interested.This might be historical bias, an
editorial angle, or a preference for highly theoretical articles.’ It is important to think
where your work would fit in. For example, some journals are slanted towards quan-
titative work, while others have reputations for publishing qualitative material or
more theory-based arguments.
Criticism
Believe it or not, you will be well used to receiving critical feedback about your
work long before you receive comments back from the peer review process. Part of
the PhD journey is about receiving criticism, working with it and developing your
ideas. Receiving critical feedback is not just about being a PhD student, but is the
process of being an academic and producing empirical findings and theoretical argu-
ment that drips into the pot of knowledge. John Roberts found that the publishing
Writing, Publishing and Networking
84
process was very helpful whilst writing up the thesis because it enabled connections
to be made between the findings and the literature as well as providing guidance on
the structure of the PhD:
While I was writing up I had also written two papers that I submitted to journals as
well as a book chapter on ethnographic methods. One of these journal articles
along with the book chapter was especially useful in making me think about struc-
turing the PhD. By focusing upon a specific part of the thesis I was forced to look
at legal statements in some detail. Indeed, external referee reports had requested
that I do so before the article was published. By doing so I was forced to make
more explicit links with my theoretical material, particularly around the work of radical
and Marxist theories of the state and law and around the work of a group of dis-
course theorists I drew upon called the Bakhtin Circle. This really was an impor-
tant turning point in my writing up experience because it helped to bring together
different threads of my PhD.
Playing the publishing game is very much about learning to use criticism con-
structively to reach the desired goal and not slumping into a corner never to submit
a piece of work again! Rejection is all part of the process.
BOX 7.1
Learning to deal with peer review is an important skill and will benefit your PhD as well
as your career. So don’t delay, get publishing today!
Career
The other reason to get on with publishing relates to getting a job. If you want
an academic career then it is essential that you timetable writing for publication
into your doctorate. If you are not intending to stay within academia then pub-
lishing during your doctorate is not as important but more about personal satis-
faction rather than career ladders. When applying for an academic post your CV
will be scanned for experience of teaching, research and publishing. If you haven’t
got publishing experience then someone else will have and you may not get the
interviews.
Papers and Publishing
85
Getting your work out there
Timing
There are no set rules for when you publish material from your PhD. It is very
exceptional to be able to publish material from your MA degree, and usually doctoral
students begin to think about publication in the second or third year. Some people
have in mind two or three articles they would like to get out of their thesis either
towards the end of writing up or later. Others decide they want to try to turn the
thesis into a monograph at the end of the process.Although turning a thesis into a
book is becoming increasingly difficult because publishers don’t make much money
from specialist books, it is possible through smaller publishers and specialist presses.
Journals sometimes invite submissions to special issues, so look out for the ‘calls for
papers’. Also, PhD students may be asked to write chapters for edited collections.
This is a useful way to begin the publishing process, as although the chapter will still
go through an editorial process, this is an opportunity for supportive feedback and a
fairly guaranteed successful outcome.
What and where to publish
Wisker (2001: 316) advises postgraduates to consider carefully why to publish, where
to publish and what to publish. Important questions indeed. Deciding what you want
to publish needs to be done in conjunction with where you want to publish.There
are many different types of academic and non-academic routes to publication that
are common amongst PhD students. Journals are the place for lengthier traditional
papers (approximately 8,000 words), but there are also opportunities for ‘observa-
tions’,or ‘methodological reflection’and ‘review essays’that tend to be shorter.Marta
Bolognani found one of the less conventional publishing options was a real boost
early on in her PhD:
If you are keen on circulating some preliminary research findings but you have not
contextualised them appropriately in a theoretical framework, you could consider writ-
ing ‘research notes’. Research notes are based on your empirical findings and have
a word length reduced in comparison to articles (usually 3,000 words).This would get
your name out in a journal without having to wait to finish writing your thesis, and the
review process would normally be significantly shorter than for an article.
Jonny Burnett has successfully used non-academic publishing outlets for his pre-
liminary findings:‘There are a variety of magazines, pamphlets and booklets which
are much more suited to shorter and more direct commentaries, which may have a
Writing, Publishing and Networking
86
far wider (and more relevant) readership.’ These avenues are not to be discounted,
but remember there is a hierarchy to types of publications. It is fairly common to
write co-authored pieces with others during your PhD; this may be other academics
you have networked with or other PhD students. However, be clear from the start
what the order of authorship is: you don’t want to do all the work and then be rele-
gated to second author. Second author is fine as long as the division of labour reflects
this. It is worth taking note of the hierarchy of writing relationships when you are
thinking about what to do next and which offers of co-writing will be fruitful.
The basic ranking order in terms of prestige is as follows:
1
Single authored book
2
Single authored journal article in peer reviewed international journal
3
Joint authored journal article in peer reviewed international journal. Here ‘joint’ refers
to an equal amount of input into the writing of the article and usually the whole
research project. This normally refers to two authors
4
Co-authored book
5
Edited book
6
Second author of journal article in peer reviewed international journal. Here ‘second
author’ can refer to several authors who have all had some level of input into the
research and writing. For instance, you could have been involved in the data analy-
sis and appear on a paper as a second author
7
Chapter in edited book
8
Grey material such as reports or magazines
9
Working papers or conference proceedings
BOX 7.2
Choose where you send your article carefully
Think about the following:
•
What is the readership or audience that your paper speaks to?
•
Are traditional journals the best place to publish at this stage?
•
Could you begin with a more specialist publication or non-academic format?
Although not ranked on the hierarchy of publishing formats, given the often
daunting nature of writing and, more so, the peer review process, there are several
journals specifically for postgraduates across the country. Most of these journals are
not specific to students studying in the host institution but are open to all.The group
Esharp (electronic social sciences and arts review for postgraduates, www.sharp.arts.
gla.ac.uk) provides a list of institutions that host postgraduate journals including:
Papers and Publishing
87
•
Postgraduate Forum – e-journal based at the School of Historical Studies, The
University of Newcastle www.ncl.ac.uk/historical/postgrad_forum/
•
ManuScript – English and American studies
Marta Bolognani’s first experience of publishing is a useful example of the process,
highlighting that a published piece of work has a lengthy history before it is sent for
review:
I presented the first draft of the paper at a workshop and once I worked around
the feedback received I sent it off to a journal. The first attempt was a failure, but
the anonymous peer reviewers still had to write extensive comments on why they
thought the paper was not suitable for publication. Once I implemented the
changes they suggested, I was able to send the paper off to another journal. This
process can take a long time, especially because you are forbidden from sending
your paper off to more than one journal at a time.
Often, final published papers start their life as ‘work in progress’ and are presented
informally to peers (often in departmental seminars) or more formally at conferences.
The paper is then ‘worked up’ into a full article before sending it to the peer review
process.
Writing it!
Once you have decided where the article is going, you need to write it. Do this to
your best ability, but don’t stagnate due to lack of confidence.After a couple of pub-
lications in what is known as ‘grey literature’ (newsletters, websites, magazines, cam-
paign literature), Jonny Burnett noted that a pattern of procrastination can set in if
your confidence is suffering a little. He advises:‘If thinking about writing a paper for
publication then perhaps the best advice is to simply “get on with it”.There is a point
where drafting and making notes must give way to the actual writing process.’ You
need to crack on also because of the amount of time it takes to go through the
review process. Initial attempts to write a journal article may take a few months.The
review process (from submission to publication) can take anywhere between 6 and
18 months, so consider this timescale in your PhD timetabling. However, as Gina
Wisker advises,‘beware that you might be sacrificing the coherence of your thesis to
a desire to get in print’ (2001: 317).Time management is crucial here and a balance
between writing the thesis and writing for publication must be achieved.
It may be that you have something already written.Teela Sanders found her thesis was
too long, so she omitted a set of findings, changed the thesis chapter into a journal
article (quite a big task which took about a month) and submitted to a journal. Rugg
Writing, Publishing and Networking
88
and Petre (2004:83) pinpoint the literature review as a place to start:‘If you have done
the literature review for your PhD properly, then it should be publishable as a review
paper.’ However, speaking from experience of rejection, make sure you do not sim-
ply bung the literature review chapter into a journal. It must be re-formatted as a
coherent article and to the style and audience of the journal.This is likely to involve
reframing your argument so that the article ‘speaks’ to the readership and does not
sound like a thesis chapter.Write the article in the journal’s house style, sticking to
word length, referencing format etc. This information is always on the journal’s
homepage under titles such as ‘information for authors’,‘notes for contributors’, or
‘author guidelines’. Make sure you apply these guidelines, as articles can be sent back
if they are not in the house style.
BOX 7.3
Be serious from the outset about your writing. You should only submit a piece that is of
your highest standard. Do not submit a piece of work before someone you respect has
considered it.
The publishing process
The process of reviewing an article in a traditional journal follows this standard
procedure:
1
Submit paper to a journal. Nowadays this is usually done electronically but check for
specifics.
2
The editor will read the paper and decide if it is within the remit of the journal.
3
If so, it will be sent out to (at least) two anonymous reviewers normally related to your
field. This is called the ‘peer review’ process and almost all journals use this to deter-
mine which articles are suitable, original and publishable.
4
They will return comments to the editor.You will receive a set of comments which are
anonymous and normally a summary of changes from the editor. The level of com-
mentary is very arbitrary ranging from a couple of sentences to a review of your
paper paragraph by paragraph correcting typos and grammar as well as the argu-
ment. Also, the editor will have reviewed these comments and will write to you with
the outcome.
5
The options are usually (1) rejection; (2) major corrections, revise and resubmit; (3)
resubmit with minor corrections; (4) acceptance. Bearing in mind that most journals
reject over 70% of articles submitted, if you get ‘revise and resubmit’ you are a winner.
Make sure you take this opportunity to address the main criticisms and resubmit
Papers and Publishing
89
within the allocated time. When you resubmit make sure you send a covering letter
stating the changes you have made and how you have addressed the feedback.
6
If the paper is rejected, use the criticisms to redraft and submit elsewhere. Don’t
despair – this is normal and happens to all academics.
7
Once you have resubmitted it the paper may either go just to the editor, or it may
be sent to review again. This process is usually quicker and you will receive some
final comments before publication.
8
When the final version has been confirmed the paper then goes to the copy editor
who will check for spelling, grammar and referencing inaccuracies. You will get a
checklist of corrections, which normally have to be turned around in days.
9
Finally, the proofs will be sent to you for checking (online) and signing the copyright
form.
10
Congratulations, you are a published academic!
BOX 7.4
Do your market research
Study the editorial objectives to make sure your work fits and read a couple of articles
in the journal to get an idea of the writing style, structure and type of material
presented.
They said what? be prepared for challenging comments
Rugg and Petre (2004: 215) advise ‘aim to have about 75 per cent of your papers
rejected’.We are slightly more optimistic than this but at the same time you should
still be aware that academic publishing is a very tough game.The comments that are
returned to you can take the form of helpful, insightful pointers on how to make the
paper into a publishable piece that makes maximum impact, or comments can be
simply unhelpful. Marta Bolognani explains:
Some of the comments can be very harsh and not expressed with consideration
of the feelings of the authors, but the pain can really be worth it if the critique is
constructive … . Anonymous peer review from a journal, whether they accept your
article for publication or not, offers the opportunity to receive comments from peo-
ple who are ‘experts’ in your field.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
90
Always look through the comments for the positive. Jonny Burnett’s experience
sums up how to deal with an article that is rejected:
Almost all authors have at some point had work turned down for publication. If
(when) this happens it is worth taking time to think clearly why this was the case.
Perhaps the paper simply was not of publishable standard, and if this is so then it
may be necessary to redraft and think about what aspects of the paper were of
use and could be incorporated elsewhere. However, it is also useful to consider
whether the publication itself was the ‘right place’ to have the work presented.
BOX 7.5
It is very hard not to, but don’t take harsh comments personally. Sift out the useful feed-
back from the comments that say more about the reviewer than your paper.
As previously indicated, there is a significant chance that you will be asked to
‘revise and resubmit’ the article to the same journal. In this scenario, the editor will
have considered the reviewers’ comments and summarised the most important
changes that need to be made before publication.However,this is great news because
it usually signifies that the article will be published subject to making the changes.
Doug Morrison offers his experience of this:
I had been invited to resubmit subject to re-formatting and some corrections.
Moreover, the reviewers had made numerous comments that ranged from struc-
tural and referencing advice to material that I had not considered and which they
felt my work would potentially benefit from.
Taken in the right spirit, reviewers’ comments can be one of the few opportunities
for direct commentary on your work.
Remember that once an article bearing your name has been published your work
may reach a range of different readerships and you are potentially opening the flood-
gates to criticism from the wider community. Jonny Burnett reflects on responses he
and his co-authors received from academics and other readers after their work had
‘gone public’:
Papers and Publishing
91
After one short article was made available on the Internet the responses were varied
and diverse. Some took the form of personal insults, others warm praise. Either way,
hearing responses to written work is a useful experience and helps the author to
reflect on what was said – even if this still results in wholehearted disagreement.
Once your work is given the seal of ‘peer review’ approval you are considered a
serious player in your field and this will attract attention and hopefully discussion and
networking. Doug Morrison found his publication sparked interest from others
respected in the field:
Since publication I have benefited from a variety of correspondence, some very
positive, supporting my work and some of course disagreeing vehemently. The
important thing is that responses from others generated discussion, some of
which has provided me with new insights into my area of research and caused me
to pause for thought and to reconsider some perspectives again.
Like supervision sessions, comments from reviewers can be useful and others are
hardly worth reading as they muddle, confuse and sometimes upset. Don’t let any of
these revelations put you off.We all have to go through it and the sooner you get
started the quicker you can learn to manage this part of the academic process.
Linking networking, conferences and publishing
Finally, it is important to think about publishing alongside engaging with confer-
ences and other forms of networking.We have dedicated the next chapter specifi-
cally to this part of the doctoral experience, because if you want to become part of
the academic community you need to network.Writing a paper for publication (in
whatever format) should be strategically linked to presenting a paper at a conference
and networking with like-minded researchers, writers, policymakers and practitioners.
Publishing before your doctorate is completed is a significant time management task
and the whole endeavour should not detract from the priority of getting those chap-
ters written.That is why thinking strategically about what to present at a conference
should be done with publications in mind.Marta Bolognani’s advice is a useful guide
to how these tasks are interlinked:
Writing, Publishing and Networking
92
Start from a presentation at a conference, then use the feedback received from the
audience to make changes to the paper and then send the paper to a journal. The
whole process can be enlightening and help develop your thoughts.
By presenting your findings or ideas at conferences and workshops your name gets known
by the relevant academic circles and it is then that you start making links with kindred
spirits. Becoming part of a network (even if this ends up being a chat in the pub, or on
an email list),enables you to ask someone in your area to have a look at an article before
you publish, or even start on a joint venture together. Feedback from conferences about
your work is helpful when writing a paper. Doug Morrison notes how feedback from
conferences and being part of a network can help with broader thinking processes:
Such correspondence has provided me with the opportunity to network with col-
leagues from a variety of different backgrounds who also share a similar area
interest. Such cross-fertilisation has proved to be a very positive experience and
has helped with my PhD.
Remember that giving a conference paper is also about taking questions and entering into
a discussion – this is useful feedback to work into your paper.Of course,once you have a
publication, whether it be in The Big Issue, a NGO website or a top-ranked journal, get-
ting your name out there enhances your networking opportunities.
BOX 7.6
Completing your PhD should be the main priority, but if you are keen to disseminate your
work, you could take a month out to write a piece for a journal. Seek your supervisor’s
advice.
Key Points to Remember

If you are thinking of an academic career then publishing during your PhD
should be a timetabled activity.

Be strategic about what conferences you attend and the papers you present.
Try to work up a conference presentation into an article.
Papers and Publishing
93

When choosing where to send your work do your homework on the journal.

Get someone you trust to read the article before you submit – not your mum
who will love it whatever you write! This could be your supervisor, another aca-
demic in your field. But again, don’t show them a sloppy unfinished version –
their time is precious too.

Only submit a paper that you think is ‘at it’s best’. Sloppiness annoys editors.

Expect to make revisions. No one gets a paper accepted without making some
changes, and with this comes sometimes harsh comments.

Don’t give up. If the paper is rejected – learn from the comments and submit
elsewhere. If you are asked to ‘revise and resubmit’ you are halfway to victory.
Do what the editors ask within the time limit – and taste the success.

Remember you are new to all of this – it takes time to learn the publishing
game. But what does practice make …?
SUGGESTED READING AND RESOURCES
Boice, R. (1994) How Writers Journey to Comfort and Fluency: A
Psychological Adventure. London: Praeger.
Murray, R. (2004) Writing for Academic Journals. Maidenhead: Open
University Press.
Rugg, G. and Petre, M. (2004) The Unwritten Rules of PhD Research.
Maidenhead: Open University Press. Chapter 8 ‘Writing’.
Esharp (electronic social sciences and arts review for postgraduates)
www.sharp.arts.gla.ac.uk
Writing, Publishing and Networking
94
Chapter 8
Networking
What this Chapter Includes:

Benefits of networking

Anxious about networking?

Where is my research community? 

Networking is about giving as much as receiving

Peer networking

Networking within your university

Seminars, conferences and research networks

Non-academic groups, discussion lists and events

What constraints do I face?
It's good to talk: the value of networking
Networking consists of ‘initiating and maintaining social relationships for professional
related purposes’ and can involve face-to-face, postal or internet based communication
(Arnold, 1997: 83).While some people seem adept at networking, others shudder at
what can appear very instrumental motivations for getting to know other people. For
Jonny Burnett networking has ‘connotations of careerism’ where interactions are about
‘insincere backslapping,laughing falsely at poor jokes or angling for new opportunities’.
However,networking,when based on mutual respect and reciprocity,can enhance your
professional life, working environment and research activities as you gain new insights
and share experiences, ideas and knowledge. Whatever you feel about networking,
whatever your experiences to date and whether you think you are any good at it – there
is no detracting from the potential value networking in progressing and enhancing your
research ideas and career. Benefits can be:
•
Gaining practice in verbally presenting, articulating and defending your ideas.
•
Finding out about new areas of inquiry or being presented with intellectual challenges.
•
Finding out about what other research and activities are being conducted in your area.
•
Finding out about job or further research opportunities.
•
Meeting ‘gatekeepers’ or other significant people who can enable you to continue with
your research or put you in touch with research participants.
•
Meeting others who may become professional colleagues or even friends.
•
Feeling part of a wider community that shares a particular research or campaigning
purpose.
•
Feeling valued and active as part of a wider community.
Sheelah Flatman Watson felt her networking activities were instrumental to her
intellectual development and also found engaging in networks across several disci-
plines helped her to gain a wider perspective of her research topic:
Networking across the academic disciplinary and practitioner communities, I
believe, was key to my understanding of a variety of perspectives – contextualising
parental and practitioner perspectives and the phenomenon being researched.
Attending a variety of gatherings and getting in touch with different groups and
individuals, gave me a broader understanding of the issues being addressed at
the various levels of the community.
Anxious about networking?
Although many appreciate the potential value of networking,many doctoral students
can still feel uncomfortable or uncertain about how to proceed. It is extremely com-
mon for postgraduates to feel anxious about networking in the context of getting to
know a research community and feeling a ‘junior’ member. For example, in the first
year of her PhD study, Marta Bolognani vividly remembers attending her first
national conference where ‘some of the most famous names in her discipline were
present’. Attending such an event and coming face to face with senior academics
whom she had admired and whose work she respected produced a mixture of emo-
tions and aspirations.While Marta wanted to ‘meet the people who had written such
crucial books for my academic development’, she also felt ‘uncertain and daunted’ at
the thought of approaching them:
I did not want to seem a ‘groupie’. I did not want to be seen to be ‘blowing my own
trumpet’ either. I also did not have anything, I assumed, that would have been of
interest to them to ‘exchange’ for conversation. In practice, though, I was quite sur-
prised about the welcoming attitudes of most of the academics. I learnt that they
are keen on networking too.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
96
BOX 8.1
Anxious about networking across your
academic community?
If you are feeling uncertain about approaching more prominent figures in your research
area remember they probably will enjoy to hear about your research and are very likely
to be interested in your research project:
•
A conversation can be started by introducing yourself, saying how much you enjoyed
their talk, letting them know that you are using their work and in what way and ask-
ing them their opinion on your research.
•
Before attending an event, if possible, find out about the keynote speakers and their
research areas. This may help you to identify people with similar research interests
and could even give you ideas on possible conversation starters!
Where is my research community? 
You may wonder if there is a research community that fits your research interests and
how to access such a community. In the early days of networking you may feel like
the outsider, with uncertainty about these issues, your worth and place in a larger
research community.Taking a proactive and reciprocal approach will help overcome
these concerns. Don’t wait for others to identify themselves or confirm your value
and inclusion – you are unlikely to receive any personal invitations to a well-defined
research community! Shelaah Flatman Watson remembers feeling the ‘outsider’ and
without a ‘research community’ for quite some time due to several reasons:
In the early days of my PhD, as a mature student, I have often felt out of step with
fellow attendees in various forums. I am not the typical research student. But also, at
the service based practitioner gatherings I was not a service provider. Neither was I
a service user, nor the parent of a service user. Where do I fit in? I have felt people
were suspicious of my position. I have learned that there is a distrust of researchers
and a cynicism towards any forms of bureaucracy, management or outsiders.
This prompted Shelaah to think through her role and research community quite
carefully. She offers valuable advice on ‘the importance of thinking through how you
present yourself in such contexts and what you can bring to interactions’. She found
‘listening, engaging in ways that are sensitive to the political and social context, and
taking a genuinely interested and empathetic approach’ helped her to connect with
‘the most reluctant service providers who could change their view of me to friend
Networking
97
rather than foe, and respect the research work that I was embarking on even though
I was documenting the experiences of the clients they serve’.
BOX 8.2
Thinking about research communities and your
relationship to them
Ask yourself:
•
Are there any collective professional groups within your research area?
•
Would you be able to contribute to or learn from these groups? In what ways?
•
Do you feel an outsider in particular collective professional settings? Why may this
be the case? What would be an appropriate way of getting involved?
•
How can you introduce yourself to a wider community? How can you present your
research interests and motivations? 
•
Are there additional (non-academic) ways you are willing and able to contribute? Can
you get involved in some voluntary or administration work for example?
Networking is about giving as much as receiving
Building trusting and reciprocal networking relationships takes time and effort. An
apparently hostile response can have a valid non-personal explanation and help you to
think about the history to the relationships established across your research community.
Being aware of this history and context can help you to think about your approach and
activities in a more informed way.Sheelah Flatman Watson’s example also illustrates how
networking can be based on mutually reciprocal exchange – summed up by the phrase
‘give and take’.This involves considering what contribution you can make and what
motivates your getting involved.The beauty of networking is the resources each person
brings to any exchange, whether these be attentiveness, interest, a list of contacts, infor-
mation or ideas – and how the sharing of such resources has multiple benefits. Marta
Bolognani took this strategy on wholeheartedly in her aspirations to be as useful to
others as they had been to her:
When you come back from conferences tidy up your notes so you have the con-
tact details and the research interests of an academic. If you do not need them
then someone else might. I can remember meeting two people working on the
same research area at two different conferences, I passed on their details to each
other and they established an exchange of ideas! When you pass on somebody
else’s contact, though, make sure that it is OK with both parties.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
98
Jonny Burnett, on the other hand, felt his role as an academic networking across
policy, political, academic and practitioner communities enabled him to contribute
to ‘breaking down barriers between academic and non-academic networks’ generat-
ing forms of shared understanding and ‘forging links between different organisations,
bodies and activities’.Within the generation of reciprocal professional relationships
you will also need to be selective to some extent. Not only are there some who do
not share in the vision or practices of reciprocity – you will need to make sure you
can deliver and are committed to any offers of help and support you provide –
equally you need to be able to decline offers and opportunities when the comple-
tion of your thesis must take priority!
Taking a proactive approach
Taking a proactive approach to networking involves taking time to plan, prepare and
find out about networking opportunities.The following sections discuss opportuni-
ties and avenues to pursue.
Peer networking
Networking with other postgraduate and research students may be a good place to
start.As Marta Bolognani noted,you can start from ‘thinking small’as ‘sometimes other
PhD students can be even more important to your work than the most senior acade-
mic in your field’as they are also immersed in recent debates.You may be familiar with
the research being undertaken by your fellow peers within your research unit, but
have you explored similar areas of interest across departmental or disciplines areas?
You may not want to ‘talk work’ with your peers all the time but are you aware of
their research interests and activities? Who do they network with? What research
issues are they dealing with? What networking events do they attend and what is
their experience of them?
Networking within your university
Your own university can provide numerous networking opportunities.A fairly obvi-
ous starting place would be within your supervisory team or departmental corridors.
Getting to know and attending events happening within your department may well
already be part of your normal working routine. These events can be valuable for
finding out about individual and collective research interests, priorities and activities.
Several universities hold regular postgraduate and departmental seminars.Beyond this,
as Jonny Burnett soon realised,‘academics tend to know many other academics and
are frequently pleased to both introduce others to colleagues and friends who have
knowledge in particular areas, and to inform people of relevant research’. It may be
an idea to:
Networking
99
•
Find out about the members of your department and university – what are members’
research interests and activities? 
•
Ask your supervisor about the conferences, events and associational groups they attend.
•
Show your interest in networking with other academics in your field.
•
Suggest hosting a small event together or within your department.
•
Seek out researchers elsewhere in the university who are engaged in similar research.
JK Tina Basi reminds us of the enhancement to our social lives in general through
active involvement in the activities of the host university:
Remember that networking is not just about work. Networking is also about adding
a social dimension to your academic life. Do your best to attend gatherings or
events in your department and at your university. Meeting people in a social set-
ting can often establish friendly relationships that will help to dilute the isolation or
loneliness you may feel during the course of your PhD. And don’t forget about vir-
tual networking! There are many opportunities on the Internet to learn of people’s
work and most provide relevant contact details should you want to get in touch.
Sheelah Flatman Watson had the opportunity to take part in social events that
were organised by her university such as the research students’‘weekend away’.This
weekend was organised for all first year students, involved students from many
universities and was structured around ‘presenting your research proposal and build-
ing a research student community’. If you find there are no organised postgraduate
events in your university can you suggest or help establish one? 
Seminars, conferences and research networks
Seminars, conferences and research workshops or ongoing networks are the most
prominent forms of networking among academic communities. Marta Bolognani
approached her academic field as a set of individuals, organisations and communities
as well as an area of academic knowledge and arguments.This involved actively:
Going through and reviewing the literature I was reading and then noting on an on-
going basis who the contemporary researchers in the field were, both at home and
abroad. I joined organisations active in the community including service provider
organisations, client group organisations and groups of academics collaborating
under varied umbrella organisations.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
100
When reading literature or researching an issue make a note of where researchers
are based and key associations and organisations operating in your research area.
Jonny Burnett then proceeded by approaching academics directly:
I have benefited from simply contacting people working in a field that I am
researching and asking if they have time to discuss their research. Although this
is perhaps rather a blunt approach, I have found that many people are prepared
to do this even when busy with other commitments.
Attending and presenting papers at conferences and seminars provides a major arena
for networking. If you haven’t already done so, you can find out about the funding
opportunities within your department for research students to attend seminars and
conferences.Several conferences offer subsidised registration fees for students and travel
expenses so check out the funding opportunities before you decide it is too costly.Your
supervisor may have valuable advice as to the most prominent and smaller scale con-
ferences and seminars to attend in your area.Take the plunge – present a paper – this
will enable you to discuss your work with other academics.
You may prefer smaller conferences, workshops or discussion groups/networks to
larger conferences.The first issue will be to find out what forms these take in your
research area. Searches on the Web, asking your supervisor and asking other acade-
mics may be fruitful lines of inquiry. Marta Bolognani found two research networks
relevant to her research area. Marta offered her support to one network through
attendance and then taking on some voluntary work within the group:
I took on some of the administrative tasks that can easily be dealt with by post-
graduate students. Tasks such as collecting names and details and then sending
them around the participants in the days after the conference can be a good way
to network and not to go unnoticed. In this way you do not have to think about a
network strategy as you will have the chance to chat with people while you are
doing your administrative task. Volunteering is also a good way to avoid paying
conference fees and have free meals if you are on a tight budget! 
Non-academic groups, discussion lists and events
As we discussed earlier, building bridges between academic and non-academic interest
groups can also be an important and valuable form of networking. Networking can
provide an endless list of possible people and organisations that can contribute to
Networking
101
your understanding of the issues in your area,can gain from your research contributions
and expand your social networks of interesting people and personalities! These
outcomes were valued by Jonny Burnett, who here describes his engagement with
campaigning groups:
In my experience various campaigners and activists are also willing to share ideas
and collaborate in projects. Moreover, this frequently provides for new and impor-
tant insights and perspectives. Simply attending events and becoming involved in
groups can lead to future collaboration when this was not the original aim.
Within such groups we would also stress that you do some preparation and give
some thought to the nature of the group and how you may be received within it:
It is important to know as much as you can about a group before endeavouring to
network with the members. It is good to know the aims and objectives of the group,
if possible, in advance. If a group represents a particular ethos then it is important
to know and respect their position regardless of whether or not it fits in with yours.
[Sheelah Flatman Watson]
What constraints do I face?
Additional to the issues of how you feel about networking and how to go about seek-
ing out networking opportunities, further issues include how to fit networking into
your research time-table. Some students can also experience several constraints limit-
ing their networking opportunities. For example, other chapters in this volume illus-
trate the way family responsibilities and part-time studying can particularly limit the
time and funding available for attending networking events. Accessing funding for
opportunities may be difficult, but by taking a proactive approach some of our con-
tributors found out about funding opportunities for research events and conferences.
Childcare may be provided on request. Additional help at a conference with note-
taking or accessibility may be available to those students with additional requirements,
especially if you personally approach the organisers and can clearly specify your support
needs.If you have a caring role and dependants you may not be able to attend as many
conferences as you would like, but in being selective, using Web-based communication
Writing, Publishing and Networking
102
and looking widely for local opportunities, you may still be able to partake in several
events.The stories of success that we have heard tended to come from students who
weren’t resigned to the constraints but took an active approach to seeking what was
available and were strategic in networking.
BOX 8.3
Thinking about networking constraints
Think about what time you can put aside for attending events each semester and each
year. Aiming to attend one major and one smaller event each year may be about right as
you need to balance networking with the production of your thesis. Also seek out addi-
tional sources of support if you feel you need them. Many organisers of conferences and
events are happy to work with you in ensuring you can participate.This will especially be
the case if you approach them with plenty of time and some ideas. Additionally, some
campaigning organisations, student unions or trusts may offer financial help for students
to attend events.
Key Points to Remember

Networking can have personal, social and professional benefits.

Think through your assumptions and views of others working in your field of
interest.

Think through your approach and the value of networking.

Attempt to map out networking opportunities by making a note of where authors
are based, asking peers, asking supervisors and other academics, and research-
ing the groups involved in all aspects of your field.

Plan to attend key annual conferences and other seminar events in your field.

Seek out opportunities beyond the academic setting.

Think about what you can contribute to networks as well as what may be useful
to you.

Prepare before attending any event by finding out about the purpose, ethos and
membership.

Assess and review your experiences and keep a note of contact details.

Think creatively, gain advice about and pursue ideas you have for establishing
new networks.

Be determined not to be excluded due to demands on you such as caring
responsibilities – you have an equally valid and worthwhile role to play and ideas
to contribute in your academic life, as well as having every right to be included
and benefit!
Networking
103
SUGGESTED READING 
Blaxter, L., Hughes, C. and Tight, M. (1998) The Academic Career Handbook,
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Catt, H. and Scudamore, P. (2000) 30 Mins to Improve Your Networking Skills.
London: Kogan Page.
Grant, W. and Sherrington, P. (2006) Managing Your Academic Career.
Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Phillips, M.P. and Pugh, D.S. (2005) How to Get a PhD: A Handbook for
Students and Their Supervisors, 4th edn. Maidenhead Open University
Press.
Wisker, G. (2001) The Postgraduate Research Handbook. Basingstoke:
Palgrave.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
104
Chapter 9
Missing the Deadline
What this Chapter Includes:

Submission rates and missing the deadline

A lack of guidance and support

Mismanaging the research process

Personal circumstances

Dealing with disappointment

Enhancing the chances of meeting the deadline

Setting deadlines and enhancing project management

Voicing your concerns and seeking help
The broader picture: submission rates and missing
the deadline
Until very recently, it remained the case that the majority of research students did
not submit their thesis by the deadline stipulated by their funding council. A few
years ago the average submission rates across the social sciences stood at 40% of
research students submitting within four years if they were undertaking a PhD full-
time with the remaining 60% of research students submitting later or not at all
(Wright and Cochrane, 2000). Concerns have been raised about submission rates
amongst research students in general, along with the particular concerns about the
lower rates within the social sciences, and the need to re-structure doctoral research
training. An over-arching theme arising from research undertaken on completion
rates is that there are usually a combination of personal, institutional and method-
ological factors leading to ‘missing the deadline’. Research has recommended that
universities should:
•
Provide quality training in research methods and techniques.
•
Monitor and standardise the quality of supervision.
•
Evaluate student performance and progression throughout the PhD process.
•
Provide a mixture of sanctions and incentives to encourage completion on time.
•
Provide an extra (1+3) training year prior to doctoral study (Wright and Cochrane,
2000).
When studies have included student perspectives and experiences of ‘missing the
deadline’, students attest to the following important contributing factors: feeling iso-
lated, inadequate supervision and support, methodological problems and financial or
personal difficulties during their doctoral studies (Becher et al., 1994; Hockey, 1994).
‘Missing the deadline’ is therefore a common student experience for many rea-
sons.This chapter aims to recognise this common situation and consider some of the
issues involved in students facing such a prospect. Ultimately, we hope to raise issues
in order to prevent potential problems and enhance your chances of completing your
PhD on time. If, however,‘missing the deadline’ is something that occurs to you, we
hope to provide some practical guidance and advice from other students who have
lived through the experience! We will review some case studies that have particularly
emphasised a lack of guidance and support, methodological or organisational prob-
lems and personal circumstances.
A lack of guidance and support
The overall message here seems to be problems with working out and negotiating
the right kind of support, guidance and supervision at the right time. Different
supervisors and universities can have alternative styles of supervision, which have
emerged from alternative perspectives and traditions for supervising doctoral stu-
dents towards successfully completing their studies on time (see Chapter 15). For
example, a more traditional approach in the UK may be to allow a student a good
measure of autonomy in confronting and coping with issues as they arise in their
research studies.This may be viewed as the ‘sink or swim’approach,or the best means
through which to encourage the student to develop independence,academic author-
ity or learning through experience. A more supportive and directive approach to
supervision on the other hand may be viewed as either responsible supervision or
‘encouraging dependency on the supervisor’. Phillips and Pugh (2005) note that in
most cases supervisory relationships may move from a more directive towards a less
directive approach as a student develops confidence and experience. However, sev-
eral contributors to this book felt they suffered from either a lack of involved guid-
ance and engagement from their supervisor, or inappropriate directive restrictions,
leading to problems in setting and meeting deadlines:
On [my supervisor’s] return [following a year sabbatical during the second year of
my thesis], it became apparent that he was not sensing my urgency and concerns
for meeting the deadline. On one occasion he let slip that he thought I was in my
second year of study. When I did submit some written work for him to look at, it 
Writing, Publishing and Networking
106
(Continued)
would take months to come back to me, often with very little feedback. We would
meet on average every 2–3 months in the early stages, but this needed to change
to every 2–3 weeks in Year 4. For whatever reason, this was not achievable.
[Martin Smith]
Mismanaging the research process
With the benefit of hindsight and reflective thinking, several contributors to this
book felt that they could have managed the research and doctoral process more effi-
ciently and effectively.This illustrates the need to monitor and develop your method-
ological and research management skills. Collecting the right data for your study,
allocating sufficient time for data collection and data analysis and establishing your
findings are all processes that require considerable management during your studies.
Additional to these general research processes are key aspects of PhD research –
developing an argument, generating a thesis from your research and establishing an
original contribution to a body of knowledge.
Martin Smith was surprised at the complexity of managing data collection, data
analysis and the writing up process. He felt he had spent too much time on collecting
data and not allowed enough time for data analysis and writing up. As we saw in
Chapters 5 and 6,it is easy to get carried away with data collection and under-estimate
the time required for data analysis and writing up.These research activities can also
be very inter-related and can beneficially be viewed as connected processes as your
findings and argument develop through cycles of engagement, analysis and thinking.
Martin Smith spent over two years collecting data and then moved on to analysing
and writing up. One difficulty that then arose, however, was the pressure of not
having enough time to analyse or of having ‘too much data’. Further, because Martin
had collected the data without in-built checks on analysing the quality of the data,
he also realised at a later stage that the data he collected was of ‘poor quality’:
I had collected a lot of information during the first three years of my PhD, but had
very little to show in the way of written chapters. I had obtained more than 1,000
responses to a questionnaire and had inputted the data into a database for statistical
(Continued)
Missing the Deadline
107
(Continued)
analysis. Alongside this, I had transcripts from focus groups. Whenever I spoke to
my supervisor or colleagues about the quantity of information I had, they were
generally impressed, although my supervisor was a little concerned that I should
not try to do too much, and should not delay analysis and write-up any further.
When it came to analysing the survey data, I found much missing data, vague
responses and few patterns of interest. I found that the hypotheses I had set out
to test could not readily be tested using my data. The focus group transcripts, too,
did not produce the quality of material I needed to test my hypotheses. At this
point, I had an urge to collect more data, but time was running out.
Such developments led to an increasing sense of concern and worry:
My difficulties began in the fourth and final year, when it came to ‘the crunch’, i.e.
pulling the empirical data together; streamlining and organising my ideas to arrive
at a ‘thesis’ or ‘argument’; and producing a written thesis. Despite my best efforts,
I simply could not write up the ‘findings’. I felt I had little of interest to say, and felt
that the points I was making were not tallying up to a bigger argument or overall
verdict. It was due to inability to manage these tasks that I ended up missing the
deadline and walking away from my PhD.
[Martin Smith]
Doug Morrison felt his approach to producing written work hampered his ability
to meet deadlines throughout the PhD process. He felt he suffered from an excessive
‘perfectionism’:
As soon as I agreed to hand in a completed chapter, I became obsessed with
handing in the perfect chapter. After all, this was my specialist area. I spent a long
time rewording and rewriting. The consequence of this was handing in an either
incomplete chapter or missing a deadline.
Being concerned with handing in a ‘perfect chapter’ can inhibit progress due to
dissatisfaction with your work! In Chapter 6 we discussed the way writing can
Writing, Publishing and Networking
108
involve a process of formulating ideas through many drafts and further redrafting.
Aiming for the ‘perfect’ chapter may well impede the progress of formulating your
ideas as students become extremely critical of what are bound to be far from perfect
early attempts at formulating an argument or writing up a chapter. If you are not
happy with your initial attempts at writing chapters, we advocate that you value
them as important first steps in a long process. Getting your ideas down, beginning
to piece together the different aspects of your thesis and producing chapters at least
in draft formats contribute to a sense that your thesis is developing and you are pro-
gressing towards the deadline.It may be worth attempting to value your first and sec-
ond attempts at writing chapters and asking yourself if they are ‘good enough’ for
now rather than ‘perfect’. You may need to value the progressive steps towards
improvement that you will need to take.
BOX 9.1
Techniques for project management and goal setting
A four-part approach to project management timetabling could include the following
stages. Deadlines can be noted on sticky notes and then arranged onto a three-year
timetable:
1
Work out and make a note of your major deadlines for each year of your research.
These can be called milestones and may include your final submission deadline,
second year upgrade, first year upgrade and final research proposal.
2
Break down each milestone into probable stages of work or steps towards reaching
the milestone – for example, your final research proposal may include two weeks
dedicated to each stage of the process including reviewing major literature; formulat-
ing research questions; thinking about your methods and design; thinking about
ethics and writing up the proposal.
3
Arrange your tasks and milestones onto an annual or three-year timetable estimat-
ing the time required for each task. If all your tasks cannot fit in you will need then to
re-think your activities and ask advice on whether you are estimating the time appro-
priately or attempting to do too much! Hopefully you will have over-estimated the time
allowed to some degree, as you will need to allow for some deadlines to be missed
or for the unexpected to occur!
4
Ask for advice from your supervisor on your milestones, tasks towards milestones
and timetabling.
Personal circumstances
Circumstances such as the unexpected ill health of a relative or undertaking paid
employment can hinder the progress towards meeting your submission deadline.
Missing the Deadline
109
Martin Smith felt taking up full-time employment once his fourth year of funding
ran out pulled him further away from the possibility of completing his PhD:
As the end of the fourth year approached, I took a six-week long vacation. When
I returned to the UK, I turned my attention to getting a full-time job. I was success-
ful in getting a Research Officer post in the university. I had half a thesis in hand
and a guaranteed income for the next 2 years. However, as I became more
involved with my new job, I drifted further away from the PhD. The last thing I
wanted to do on returning home in the evening was open up the thesis on the com-
puter, or start analysing data. Weekends, too, were particularly hard. As each one
came and went, I realised that I would not finish the thesis quickly, and it would in
fact be harder than ever, especially as the remaining chapters would be the most
challenging to produce.
Dealing with disappointment
Experiencing difficulties in meeting the submission deadline with time slipping away
can be very demoralising. The combined feelings of worry, anxiety and insecurity
can put even more pressure on a student at a time when extra effort and concentra-
tion is required to progress. Martin Smith found the final year of his PhD a time
when increasing pressures and a fear of ‘falling behind’ compared to his peers con-
tributed to a declining sense of self-pride, self-esteem and well-being. He describes
a common process of ‘losing pride in my work and confidence in myself’. He
became ‘very despondent’ which in turn affected his relationships with others who
‘became uneasy’ around him. His confidence and motivation was further shaken as
his peers started to complete their PhDs and move on.
A sense of falling behind can be very demoralising. Many students will be under
pressure to complete within four years and will be concerned that their funding is
also time-limited. Many can find dealing with such anxieties difficult, especially if
other students appear to be progressing and even completing their research around
you. While ‘feeling the pressure’ can be a spur to prioritise your studies and be
more productive, long-term anxiety and stress can lead to emotional and physical
exhaustion (see Chapters 14 and 18).The following sections consider some aspects
of managing this situation and enhancing your progress towards overall deadline
submission.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
110
Enhancing the chances of meeting
the deadline
Setting deadlines and enhancing project management
Your doctoral progress may be enhanced by analysing and developing your project
management orientation and skills. It is unlikely that leaving the majority of the
writing up to the last year will pay off as a strategy for completing a quality thesis.
Project management is all about devising ways of mapping out the activities that
make up your doctoral project and guiding your progress through a number of goals
and stages.The idea is to break up your thesis into stages that are appropriate with
realistic short-term and long-term deadlines that have been worked out and thought
through in relation to the time available and objectives required. Setting targets can
be part of a broader strategy of overall project management.This is about organising,
monitoring and managing your progress throughout. At the very least the process
will enhance your awareness of what can and needs to be done, and when.While
project management does mean the ‘what’ and ‘when’ of your PhD are planned out,
most approaches allow for flexibility and adjustment in the event of missed deadlines.
A major benefit will be that any slippage is recognised at a very early stage and the
whole ‘project’ can then be readjusted in line with new time constraints and dead-
lines.In planning out your research activities,you can break down your research pro-
ject into major and minor milestones, thinking about long-term and short-term
goals – a process detailed further in Box 9.1 above.You can also timetable in periods
that you will need to dedicate to other commitments such as autumn semester
teaching assistance or the family summer holiday.
Doug Morrison felt he could have benefited from more deadlines throughout his
thesis as well as altering his approach. Such deadlines could have been viewed as
helpful for monitoring and establishing progress rather than a demonstration of ‘bril-
liance’. He reflects:
In terms of material to be submitted, just remember that the purpose of the dead-
line is not to hand in a perfect piece of work. Indeed, with the benefit of hindsight,
it is now clear that the main purpose of any deadline is to allow your supervisor to
monitor your progress. Therefore, if you are unable to complete your work before
the deadline, hand in what you have managed to do. This will allow your supervi-
sor to monitor your progress, assess the cogency of your work and, as it pro-
gresses, the overall coherency of your thesis. Try to view the process as a means
to an end rather than simply an end in itself.
Missing the Deadline
111
BOX 9.2
Finding out about institutional regulations, doctoral
milestones and submission regulations
Important information to find out about and inform your project timetable will be:
•
University regulations for the submission of doctoral research.
•
The timing and objectives of important progress milestones and assessments such
as your annual report or MPhil upgrade submissions.
•
Institutional policies on extensions for submissions and fees for additional years of
study following the submission deadline.
•
Timing for annual postgraduate conference or symposium events.
•
Supervisory team expectations for deadlines for written work.
•
Supervisory availability and absence from the university during your doctoral
research.
•
Procedures for supervision during supervisor absence.
Voicing your concerns and seeking help
You may need to proactively generate an approach akin to project management –
encouraging your supervisor to set and negotiate a long-term perspective for dead-
lines throughout your thesis. If you start to get worried about your progress and feel
you may be falling behind, a timetable approach will help you to spot any delays.
Acting to re-schedule your timetable at the earliest possible stage may help you to
avoid ultimately missing the submission deadline. However, for many reasons stu-
dents delay ‘speaking up’ about their difficulties or worries:
If you are struggling to meet the deadline, whether due to writer’s block, poor data
quality or a difficult personal situation, do not be afraid to tell your supervisor.They
are in a position, and have a responsibility, to assist you. Be direct with them. They
should be able to look at your thesis plan and say what areas could be simplified,
and what is less important. If you try to resolve these issues yourself, you run the
risk of wasting precious time and making misguided choices. Let your supervisor
take some of the responsibility, and change supervisors if you’re not getting the
support that you require. They might not be offended – they might be similarly
relieved!
[Martin Smith]
Writing, Publishing and Networking
112
Students may not want to draw attention to their difficulties,may not want to bur-
den busy supervisors or appear too complaining. Struggling in silence, however, also
does not seem to be a very effective way of overcoming problems in the PhD
process:
If some of your problems are personal ones, my advice is not to struggle on in
silence as I did. Make an appointment with your supervisor and let them know
what is going on.The deadline or deadlines can be re-arranged.You may even find
that they have experienced similar situations themselves or have experience of
such situations as a result of previous PhD candidates. In this scenario honesty is
the best policy.
[Doug Morrison]
What will be important is to find some way of thinking through your problems,
concerns and options. If you prefer, this may involve writing your concerns and
options down for yourself, and investigating what time and activities are required.
However, there are many sources of support and accessing these resources could also
be important for you in gaining advice and guidance that may help (see Part 4).
Finding the right support and approaching a person with whom you feel at ease will
be important.
Key Points to Remember

Many research students submit their thesis in the year following their original
deadline.

Reasons for missing the deadline can vary and include inadequate supervi-
sion, over-ambitious research projects, lack of project management, method-
ological difficulties or personal/unexpected circumstances.

Auditing and developing your project management and research management
skills may help you to keep to schedule.

Think about the role of your expectations and consider whether you are
expecting too much or too little from yourself.

Set long-term and short-term goals informed by your main yearly milestones
throughout your project.

Attempt to seek support and discuss your worries about meeting your dead-
line at an early stage and with your supervisor.
Missing the Deadline
113
SUGGESTED READING
Dunleavy, P. (2003) Authoring a PhD Thesis: How to Plan, Draft, Write and
Finish a Doctoral Dissertation. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Howard, K., Sharp, J.A. and Peters, J. (eds) (2002) The Management of a
Student Research Project. Aldershot: Gower.
Marshall, S. and Green, N. (2004) Your PhD Companion. Oxford: How To
Books.
Tarling, R. (2005) Managing Social Research. London: Routledge.
Walliman, N.S.R. (2005) Your Research Project: A Step-by-Step Guide for the
First Time Researcher. London: Sage.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
114
Chapter 10
The Viva and Beyond
What this Chapter Includes:

What happens after submission?

How to prepare for the viva

A brief look at the thesis examination

An outline of the possible outcomes

Tips for what to do in the post-viva stage

Looking beyond the doctorate to getting a job

Thinking about your career in tandem with writing up
You have submitted – now what?
After the thesis has been submitted there is an expectant period of waiting for the
viva date.This can be filled with a mixture of either sheer relief, deep concern about
the pending examination, or you may have reached the point of apathy. Hopefully,
somewhere in your rainbow of emotions in the ‘ending’ stage you will still feel pas-
sionate for the topic and findings which should provide renewed enthusiasm for get-
ting over the final hurdle.There are lots of different sources of information on how
to prepare and succeed in the viva, as well as university and conference workshops
and seminars that provide ample space to think and prepare for it.This chapter takes
you through some of the basics with regard to planning and doing the examination,
but we also look over the parapet at what happens afterwards.We think about plan-
ning the next career move during the writing up phase,as well as presenting some typ-
ical case scenarios of where and how doctorate social science and humanities students
find jobs within the academy.
It may be of some comfort to know that there is much controversy amongst edu-
cationalists, university managers and academics regarding the place of the oral exam-
ination as the assessment form that judges the doctorate in the contemporary
university setting.While the tradition of the oral defence of the thesis can be traced
back to the Middle Ages, students now face a vastly different world of PhD study
from 1917, when Oxford University imported the viva voce to Britain from the
German system (Jackson and Tinkler, 2001: 356). Now, the concerns are with the
need for transparency regarding the oral examination process, fairness, reliability and
consistency within and across universities, resulting in a growing number of acade-
mics calling for a reform of this traditional system. Jackson and Tinkler (2001) con-
ducted research to explore the purposes of the viva using university policy statements
and the perspectives of academics and PhD candidates.This research concluded that
there was ‘no consensus regarding the roles of the viva in the PhD examination
process’(2001:66) and that there are substantial differences placed on the importance
of the viva in the overall examination.While debates continue, students must work
within the current regulations and the best way to do this is by understanding the
process and preparing for the event from an early stage.
BOX 10.1
Check the regulations and administrative process
in your institution
•
What forms do you need to fill in before you submit?
•
What criteria must be followed in terms of presentation and binding styles?
•
Are there key dates when you can submit?
What we come to know about the ‘viva’ as a PhD student grows from academic
mythology and legend that relays tales of students’ dire experiences of being locked
in an office for hours whilst subjected to an excruciating scrutiny of their work by
two ‘experts’ who have used toothpicks to survey every sentence of the manuscript.
The viva is tough and so it should be, given what is being awarded. It must be
remembered that only a small percentage of students walk out of the viva with a ‘no
corrections’ badge of approval as most students have work to complete and often
have to resubmit the thesis after corrections have been made (see below). Moving
away from the horror stories and positively framing the viva as an important step-
ping stone on the final home stretch can dispel myths and strangely help it become
an event to look forward to.This is what this chapter hopes to do, and put you at
ease about the examination process from the start.
The viva can be thought of as a special supervision session with two experts that
can really shape what you do with your research findings and career.This may be the
only time that you are 100% confident that all the people in the room have read,
word for word, what you have written! The viva can be a meeting of minds, hope-
fully a discussion between intellectual equals – as, after all, you know your work
Writing, Publishing and Networking
116
better than anyone. (Just count how many times you are given that little gem of
advice!) However, Gina Wisker is cautious:
It is a mistake to think of the viva as a friendly chat among equals that will be
quickly over, or equally to characterise it as a moment when the research can be
presented as if at a conference. The viva offers a rare opportunity to share and
deliberate over your work with experts but is also a strange mixture of a taxing and
potentially exhilarating exchange.
The myths surrounding the viva are also fuelled by concerns about the role of the
internal and external examiner and how they will perform when they are given the task
of coming to an agreement over someone else’s piece of work.Your PhD is in the fir-
ing line to become an intellectual battleground for academics who fiercely defend their
territories and reputations! These competing dynamics mean that you should consider
carefully who is approached to examine your thesis.Your supervisor, who also has a
vested interest not to send you into a lion’s den, usually guides this process. But choos-
ing your examiners should be a joint decision that you are comfortable with.
How to prepare for the viva
The viva is like an unseen exam.You will not know the questions and the potential
topics are broad. Preparing for the viva can also be conceptualised into two phases:
long-term preparation and short-term revision.Like any exam preparation,the long-
term planning takes the form of doing the work by attending the sessions and doing
the reading, as well as a specific revision period before the exam. But first, let’s see
what criteria you need to fulfil in the viva.
Tinkler and Jackson (2004:43) summarise what you are expected to do in the viva:
•
Authenticate the thesis.
•
Locate the research in the broader context.
•
Clarify aspects of the thesis.
•
Develop ideas.
•
Justify aspects of the work.
•
Reflect critically on the thesis.
This list of competencies may look daunting outlined here out of context, yet you
should realise that this is what you have been doing in various ways throughout your
PhD. Presenting your work, answering questions, relating your findings to the
broader literature and critically reflecting and refining is what you will have done in
The Viva and Beyond
117
your supervision sessions. Presenting at a conference or workshop, and passing
various milestones such as upgrades are training opportunities in defending your
work amongst peers and ‘experts’.
BOX 10.2
Candidates should seek every opportunity to articulate and defend their work with
others, explaining why they have chosen specific theories, methodology and methods,
how the research question underpins all their research design and their argument, and
how their work contributes to knowledge.
[Gina Wisker]
Long-term planning and preparation for the viva should be integrated into your
progress. Engaging in the expected activities that require you to present your work
will give you time to reflect on feedback, spruce up your communication skills and
focus on how you conduct yourself when talking to others about your work.
Although preparation for the viva is an ongoing process,there are short-term revi-
sion tips that are helpful for when the thesis has been handed in.While preparation
is important, time and space away from the manuscript is a crucial aspect of the
reflection stage. Not picking up the thesis for a month after submission can be a
relief, provide some distance from the emotions and stress of getting to submission
and also enables some critical reflection to develop.Three weeks preparation time is
a reasonable expectation. Here are some tips on how to approach the revision:
•
Re-read the manuscript highlighting weaknesses, gaps and mistakes that are likely to
be picked up by an examiner. Then prepare to be asked about these issues.
•
Survey those who have recently gone through the viva experience – peer support is a
must to dispel the grapevine horror stories.
•
Take up the offer (or request one) of doing a mock viva with supervisors.
•
Read the regulations and familiarise yourself with the possible outcomes.
•
Be emotionally prepared – the viva is rarely the end.
•
Think about the practicalities and arrangements on the day.
•
Read a comprehensive study skills guide on how to prepare for the viva (see Suggested
Reading).
Tinkler and Jackson (2004) have an excellent chapter dedicated to mock vivas that
clearly sets out the advantages and limitations. Mock vivas can take several forms,
including a video-taped format that you can take away and review, a peer audience
of students, or a public mock viva where academics act out the scenario for others
to learn from (2004: 138). Normally, your supervisor and another member of the
Writing, Publishing and Networking
118
department will conduct a mock viva with you to give you experience of the
process. Hartley and Fox (2004) surveyed a small sample of students who underwent a
mock viva and 90% (26) of respondents judged this form of preparation to be helpful.
Mocks do steady the nerves, but like the real thing they still have to be prepared for
and cannot be a complete likeness for the real one! If you undergo a mock viva,don’t
be complacent for the actual examination as it is most unlikely that the examiners
will ask you the exact same questions.
BOX 10.3
It is important to rehearse how to frame, clarify, explore and express details of the thesis.
Be prepared for questions that expect you to explain, describe and defend your work
using the language of ‘doctorateness’ (words such as inductive, deductive, conceptual
framework, theoretical perspectives, conceptual conclusions and so on).
[Gina Wisker]
As well as a long-and short-term preparation phase for the viva, Tinkler and
Jackson (2004: 142) suggest a final stage of preparation in the days running up to the
event. Their division of tasks between practical arrangements, meeting with your
supervisor and academic preparations is a useful way of approaching those final cou-
ple of days before the examination.
The examination
When you are in the viva it is probably a fair assessment to say that it is a rather sur-
real experience.Your emotions and adrenalin are running high, as you feel it is the
most important day of your life and that the two people sitting in front of you have
your future pathway at their fingertips. Do not under-estimate the power of nerves
and take precautions to address these.Wear comfortable clothing, but remember also
this is a formal occasion. Drink to ensure you are well hydrated and take deep
breaths. Take a copy of the thesis with you and don’t be alarmed when you see
hundreds of sticky notes sticking out of the examiners’ copies. Remember to take
notes and ask questions from the examiners. Use affirmative language that qualifies
your piece of work as original, robust and contributing new knowledge to the field.
Have a tick list of areas that you are particularly keen to talk about and make sure
you bring the discussion round to including these. At the end of the viva be very
clear about what the examiners are recommending and their specific advice.Ask the
examiners to go through what happens next.
The Viva and Beyond
119
BOX 10.4
Discussion Questions
Gina Wisker notes that popular discussion questions in the viva range from:
•
Why you chose the topic.
•
What contribution to knowledge you feel your research makes.
•
The appropriateness of your choice of methods, methodology and data analysis.
•
Theoretical contributions.
•
Key points from each chapter and how they contribute to the overall argument.
It is very important to be prepared for the outcome.The examiners have four options
to choose from when considering their recommendation.You should consult your
institution’s own guidelines but the basic outcomes are:
•
Award with no corrections
•
Award subject to minor corrections
•
Referral
•
No award or award at a lower degree
All of these outcomes have various details,criteria and timescales attached which you
should find out about nearer to the time.You will be sent an examiners’ report that
is the formal record of the event with some clear pointers for change. Remember, if
you fail the viva and you think there are mitigating circumstances (such as the uni-
versity’s procedures were not followed, the examination panel was inappropriate or
personality clashes) then there is a robust appeals process.
Post viva: celebration, commiseration and more work!
It is a misconception that the PhD is finished at the viva stage. It is true that a the-
sis should only be submitted for examination if the supervisor and student feel that
the work is at the necessary standard, but usually there is further work to be done,
which could be anything from a few typos and grammar corrections to a substantial
rewrite. Gina Wisker suggests that how students think about the viva can prepare
them for the realistic likelihood that there will be more work to be done afterwards:
Most PhD students and supervisors view the viva as the last part of the PhD
process. But with so few PhDs actually being awarded with absolutely no correc-
tions, it can actually be more realistically seen as a major moment of summative
assessment which acts as one of formative assessment and feedback, leading to
revisions and the strengthening of the PhD.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
120
Sonali Shah submitted her PhD in the social sciences after four years and was at a
loss to find out this was not the end:
I was so relieved and excited when I saw all seven chapters of my work printed
and bound together that I never imagined the end was not yet in full view. The end
was, in actual fact, another year away, which I discovered after spending two hours
trying to defend my thesis to a couple of strangers, only to get referred and be
given another year to rewrite the whole thing before resubmission.
There can clearly be a range of outcomes from the viva that mean different types of
work are required. But whether you are referred or pass without corrections, there
will still be work to be done.The formula for learning from the viva does not only
rest in the final examiners’ report, but alongside your supervisor you should reflect
on what was said in the viva and make a list of the advice and tasks based on short-,
medium- and long-term changes. Gina Wisker reflects on a case where the student
was referred, and demonstrates a useful strategy for learning from the examiners and
taking an action plan forward:
Together with the supervisor the student reviewed the recommendations of the
examiners, turning these into an agenda for the new work that would make more
use of the research question, argument and the data. A revised timeline, some tar-
gets and serious discussions about the elements of the thesis that required clarity
and conceptual work supported this agenda.
If you are one of the few that has passed with flying colours then there are ques-
tions about how to take the thesis forward. Should it be turned into a book and
therefore requiring a book proposal and the search for a publisher? Or, how many
articles can be extracted from the thesis, for which journals and in what order of
priority? Do I have obligations to disseminate my work to the participants, users,
gatekeepers and policymakers? If, like many, you have minor corrections to make,
what is the timescale for these and how will they be actioned given your current
work commitments? Either way, the outcomes of the viva inevitably mean that
there is more work to be done before being awarded the doctorate or to achieve
the next career move.
The Viva and Beyond
121
BOX 10.5
By the time the viva arrives you may well be immersed in another job with mounting
commitments. Make any correction of the thesis a priority, otherwise the thesis can drift
away from you.
Thinking about ‘after’ before it arrives
Obviously it is not the case that PhD students begin to consider their careers after
the viva or when the doctorate is finally awarded. Recalling the motivations for
starting a PhD outlined in Chapter 1, it is clear that many students are very
focused on their career pathways from day one.This section therefore will high-
light some key tips for thinking about getting a job whilst still working towards
the PhD and how various milestones can be met before you are actually ready to
send off applications.
There are several long-term activities that can help build momentum for your
next step after the PhD. Justin Waring was convinced he wanted to stay in academia
from an early stage, so began arming himself with knowledge of the job market
while he was writing up the thesis:
Through attending seminars such as University Research Training modules in
‘CV Writing’ and ‘Interview Skills’ together with searching career websites I was
informed about the many avenues and opportunities for progression. The options
ranged from post-doctoral studentships, early career fellowships or research
grants, to teaching or research appointments. I sought out other opportunities,
through making almost daily searches of jobs.ac.uk and never missed Tuesday’s
Guardian.
There are several options for the student who wants to continue with their
research and teaching interests, some of which Justin outlines above. However, the
criteria for entering into academia in this particular climate of the Research
Assessment Exercise, the emphasis on winning research money and publications is
daunting for those just starting out. Justin explains how he slowly realised that the
criterion for entering academia is not only the award of a doctorate; other badges
of proof are required.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
122
Exposure to the job market highlighted a further important issue for career
progression: the need to write from my work, either as a monograph or in peer
reviewed journals, to further prove the intellectual worth of my studies to the out-
side world. I was fully aware that the development of a ‘publication profile’ goes
hand-in-hand with post-doctoral progression: the idea of ‘publish or die’ is firmly
established in academic parlance.
BOX 10.6
Build up your CV
If you want a career in academia it is important to build up your CV over time, aiming to
include some publications before you apply for post-doctoral employment. Teaching
experience is also important if you want to apply for a lectureship.
One of the familiar steps into ‘the academy’ is to take up work as a contract researcher.
Despite this being an embedded aspect of the research culture,little is written about this
type of work. Collinson (2003) has written about the marginal status of the contract
researcher, and although employment rights have been strengthened recently, this job is
fraught with instability because contracts rarely go beyond two years. Justin Waring took
up contract research and reflects on the negative aspects:
In the academic world I have found nothing quite as demoralising, depressing and
in many ways disrespectful to the hard work of a researcher than the short-term
and insecure nature of contract research.
The inherent nature of short-term contract work is usually what PhD students
want to avoid after a fairly unorthodox period of several years with a minimum salary
and obvious financial worries. But there are clear benefits of doing contract research:
•
Working on a new topic and new data.
•
Using new and alternative methodology.
•
Developing your own topic.
•
Extending networks.
•
Time for writing papers and teaching.
•
Developing your CV and specific research training.
The Viva and Beyond
123
BOX 10.7
Contract research
Contract research work is often a viable stop-gap whilst finishing off the doctorate or look-
ing for permanent employment. Make sure you are clear what your contract includes and
negotiate time for writing up papers from your doctorate and early career development.
How will the contract research job benefit you?
There are other wider structural issues to consider when choosing a career in
academia. Finch (2003: 133) describes how the organisational environment of uni-
versities also reflects both the horizontal and vertical gender segregation of women’s
position in the labour market. Finch reports that in pre-1992 universities women
occupy less than one-quarter of academic posts while the proportion of female pro-
fessorships remains on average 10%. Rangasamy (2004) provides research that identifies
four aspects of institutional racism in Higher Education:the legacy of colonial thinking;
active discrimination; conservatism and institutional defensiveness. Universities are old,
white, male institutions and while interventions to do something about institutional
racism are under way, the reproduction of racism through the ‘sheer weight of white-
ness’ (Back, 2004: 1) will take a while to unpick.While not wanting to disillusion
students,it must be remembered that although academia is quite different from many
other employment sectors, the inequalities and segregation that exist in society are
not exempt from university settings.
Non-academic careers
Of course, PhD students do not necessarily stay in academia. Figures show that in
2003 (UK Grad Programme, 2004: 14–15), the 3,765 UK-domiciled PhD graduates
working in the UK were spread across a range of employment sectors:
•
16% worked in manufacturing
•
16% worked in health and social care
•
9% worked in finance and IT sector
•
6% worked in public administration
•
48% worked in education
There are two ways of considering applying your PhD outside academia:
1
Using your knowledge to enter a specialist field that will utilise:
•
Scientific research knowledge
•
Expert knowledge in a particular subject
•
Specific research skills
Writing, Publishing and Networking
124
•
Policy knowledge and development skills
•
Working with particular user groups, communities and social issues
2
Opting for an unconnected professional career that will:
•
Utilise your broader project management skills
•
Use researcher skills for unrelated areas
•
Apply problem-solving and analytical skills
•
Enhance communication, written and oral skills
Such professions include management consultancy, investment banking, profes-
sional services and public administration. Many of the large multinational companies
seek people with a PhD to take on management roles that require generic training
to a high standard. PhD graduates with skills in quantitative methods are directly
sought by investment banking companies.
BOX 10.8
Non-academic careers
UK Grad Programme offers lots of information for non-academic careers. Check out the
GRAD Schools and the Careers in Focus programme, which is free and will benefit you
in the following ways:
•
Meet people currently working in other professions
•
Hear about the job in detail
•
Learn about the application process
•
Ask questions that are specific to your circumstances
•
Learn about the working environment
One important thing to remember is that you have acquired a critical and analyt-
ical mind,with self-motivation and the ability to work autonomously on a large pro-
ject. These are skills that are marketable, so whether you are inside or outside
academia, you have a lot to offer employers.
BOX 10.9
Doctorate graduates are the most highly skilled and educated group produced by the
British education system, so be mindful of your specialist transferable skills, which many
different employment sectors will be attracted to.
The Viva and Beyond
125
Key Points to Remember

Preparing to defend your thesis and proficiently answer questions about your
work should be weaved into your overall progress and not just something to
think about preparing before the viva.

Preparation can be conceptualised as long-term, short-term revision and the
final stages.

Do your research and discuss with your supervisor who are the best examin-
ers. You should have considerable input here.

There are four outcomes that examiners can recommend – be clear what they
mean.

The viva is not the symbolic ending of the PhD that legend would have it.
Whatever the recommendation, it will mean more work.

If looking for a career in academia and research, attention should be given to
what is expected, in particular peer reviewed publications, early on in your
career planning.

Institutional racism and gender segregation in Higher Education do not make
academia any more protected from structural inequalities than other sectors.
SUGGESTED READING AND RESOURCES
Murray, R. (2003) How to Survive Your Viva: Defending a Thesis in an Oral
Examination. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Secrist, J. and Fitzpatrick, J. (2000) What Else You Can Do With a PhD.
London: Sage.
Tinkler, P. and Jackson, C. (2004) The Doctoral Examination Process.
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Writing, Publishing and Networking
126
Part III
Shifting Identities and
Institutions
In this third section we wanted to take a fresh look at the people who are taking
doctoral studies in the contemporary academic setting and how their identities
were affected by the processes of doing a PhD. In this section, we focus on how
students’ identities are affected by studying and working towards a PhD. They are
changed by taking on new roles and working with old roles and experiences. Not
only will you come out of the doctorate having produced an original piece of work,
but no doubt you will have done a lot of work on yourself in the meantime.
Long gone is the pattern where students move from undergraduate to masters and
then PhD studies in a succinct, continuous flow. Often PhD studies are taken in con-
junction with work commitments, after a career, alongside a career and frequently
with family commitments to bear in mind. We start this section of the book with
Chapter 11 reflecting on how people come into PhD study from different routes,
highlighting that the non-traditional route could fast become the dominant entrance
route into postgraduate study. Taking on a PhD later in the lifecourse brings with it
additional issues that are important to consider as everyday occurrences for those
entering education at a later stage. Here we deal with the rub between work expe-
rience and entering a world of study that can seem very alienating. We make links
between skills and tasks often performed in other work environments to identify core
transferable skills. Equally we look at the rise in ‘professional doctorates’ as an option
for those professionals already involved in career trajectories.
Increasingly, students are taking on PhDs on a part-time basis. We considered this
to be a growing area that warranted a specific look at the pros and cons of study-
ing part-time. Here, specific issues such as time management and being away from
the institution for the majority of time are looked at from the student’s perspective.
Chapter 13 takes a look at the relationship between doing teaching work whilst
continuing with the research degree. Teaching undergraduates when doing your
doctorate is a very common experience, yet receives little consideration from the stu-
dent’s viewpoint. We look at the benefits for taking on teaching, how to protect
your research time and corner-cutting strategies to save you a few extra hours in the
week when preparing for teaching. Chapter 14 puts the emotional aspect of doing
a PhD into the spotlight. Taking on board this task is an emotional journey and our
contributors reflect on how their emotions were implicated both in doing the
research and also doing the PhD as separate but interlinked processes.
Chapter 11
Non-traditional Routes into
the PhD
What this Chapter Includes:

Alternative routes into doctoral studies

Special issues for older postgraduates

Adapting to a new way of working

Applying previous experience to new challenges

The complexities of managing several identities

The differences and similarities between work and research

Professional doctorates
Starting a PhD later in the lifecourse
The changing nature of Higher Education and the workplace in the twenty-first
Century now means that it is no longer the case that the majority of PhD stu-
dents are those who have traditionally come straight from an undergraduate degree
(also see Chapter 16). The most common path is to take an MA or to work in
various related and unrelated work settings before contemplating a PhD. With a
rise in distance learning postgraduate courses from diplomas, certificates, masters
level courses as well as a few universities offering PhDs on a distance learning
basis, studying is taking on new and innovative forms. Distance learning courses are
a popular avenue to re-entering education and gaining a qualification without
making geographical changes. The competition for funding is now so fierce that
successful candidates often already have a postgraduate qualification and/or experi-
ence from a career before applying.The last ten years have seen a rise in the num-
ber of non-traditional routes into doctoral education as individuals are presented
with opportunities to undergo independent study at a later stage in the lifecourse.
As noted in Chapter 1, the reasons for taking on doctoral studies can be to
develop an existing career or can be a gateway into a new career. Whatever the
motivations, for older people returning to Higher Education there are some specific
issues to consider and practical suggestions for tackling unfamiliar ground. This
chapter looks at the experiences of mature students, their transition from other jobs
to doing a doctorate, and offers some strategies to help the transition go smoothly.
Older students – returning to study
Whatever the domestic circumstances, the decision to re-enter Higher Education is
not taken lightly by those who are returning to education after ‘a life elsewhere’.
Osborne,Marks and Turner (2004) conducted a large-scale study exploring the deci-
sion making of mature students to return to education.They found a typology of six
different categories of people:
•
Delayed traditional students.
•
Late starters.
•
Single parents.
•
Careerists.
•
Escapees.
•
Personal growers.
These categories highlight distinct motivating factors that may encourage people
to re-enter education, while at the same time the categories reinforce how older
students are taking on study often under very different circumstances to their younger
peers.
Melanie Shearn reflects on her contemplation of doing a PhD whilst having a
family and leaving a career.
There were two main factors that concerned me while I considered applying for a
PhD. Could I afford it, and could I stick out three years working on one project by
myself? Could I go back to being a full-time student for that period of time?
Someone who has re-entered education at a later stage will face complex dynam-
ics of juggling other roles and commitments whilst starting out on a new path.This
can produce both anxiety and exhilaration, but inevitably becoming a ‘mature’ stu-
dent means taking on additional roles.Bill Armer re-entered education in his 40s and
went on to complete a PhD in 2005. Here, he reflects on the issue of juggling iden-
tities and recognises that as an older person there is more at stake:
Shifting Identities and Institutions
130
As an older person, you are likely to carry far more labels – perhaps parent, carer,
provider, partner – than your ‘standard’ colleagues. This means that you will not
usually be categorised as simply ‘a student’. The unifying factor is that ‘responsi-
bility’ very often translates into monetary need, and almost always infers an emo-
tional tug of war between the competing demands of ‘significant others’ on our time
and energy and our own desire for personal (and perhaps financial) fulfilment.
Remembering that Higher Education has traditionally been the domain for the
white male middle classes, there are tensions here between the relationships of class,
ethnicity and gender in the traditional Higher Education settings. Marks (2003)
explains the historical traditions of the ambivalent relationship between working class
men and Higher Education while Britton and Baxter (1999) note that becoming a
mature student has different meanings for men and women. Older students often
carry more personal and familial commitments than the traditional doctorate student
who is under 30 years old and often with fewer life commitments.While the major-
ity of older students may have family commitments, women with children will
undoubtedly be faced with a double burden of both caring commitments and man-
aging a household as well as studying and/or employment (Raddon, 2002). Care
commitments to children and elders often feature as a significant compromise for
female older PhD students as their studies are often affected by circumstances outside
their control.The double burdens that women in academia may feel are compounded
by a patriarchal institution that has been built on a sharp gender divide resulting in
women facing different challenges to men in doctoral studies (Kurtz-Costes et al.,
2006). Life commitments have implications for how the game is played and the type
of ‘studenthood’ that is experienced. These additional tensions relating to gender,
class and age may well play out in the decision to put your hand up for the demand-
ing job of juggling a work–life balance with a programme of research that has fluid
boundaries and somewhat unconventional demands.
BOX 11.1
Female doctoral students
Female students, especially those with care commitments, may have a different experi-
ence from male peers due to the historical gender imbalance that university systems are
built upon. Check for instance about flexible working hours, if meetings can be in school
hours, the balance of women in the Faculty, the provisions for childcare from your fun-
ders etc. (also see Chapter 17).
Non-traditional Routes into the PhD
131
Alongside gender, age is invariably a social factor that influences the experiences
of older students.You may well encounter negative images and treatment as a result
of ageism and discrimination may not be directly obvious. Older students can often
feel pressure to demonstrate their wisdom and knowledge gained through work
and life experience.This can lead to older students not being given the same atten-
tion as younger students because there is an assumption that they can cope. In a
world where technology shapes our lives, an area of tension can be that of tech-
nology and computing. Many IT skills, such as emailing and using Microsoft Word,
are now considered life skills that are acquired outside the university setting and
therefore it is assumed that all students already have this capability. It may be that as
an older student the technological revolution has passed you by and you are not as
technologically equipped as the course organisers assume. This demonstrates how
some older students feel the university setting is predicated on ‘assumptions of com-
petence’(Phillips and Pugh,2005:129),which ignores the situation that older students
often find themselves in.A lack of understanding from the university system that some
students do not come from traditional routes can breed feelings of resistance and
resentment. Below we analyse how the PhD can be approached as if it were a job,
transferring strategies from mainstream employment to tackle the unwieldy and
vague reality of doing a PhD.
Applying work wisdom to the challenge of academia
Moving out of a full-time career back into the unfamiliarity of Higher Education
can be an anxious change. Returning to education after a ‘life elsewhere’ can be an
advantage as a wealth of experience gained in other jobs can be effectively applied
to doctoral studies from the outset. Managing a previous career has invariably meant
working to deadlines, project management and timetabling, co-operating and nego-
tiating with line managers, finding solutions to complex problems, working
autonomously, being resourceful and making and sustaining new networks.All these
skills are entirely transferable, and indeed very useful, to the PhD.
A strong theme that came out of speaking with postgraduates about approaches
or ‘philosophies’ for approaching the PhD was to consider the research project like
a job:
Put simply, the important thing to do is to consider the research programme as a
job. Poorly paid, but intrinsically interesting and offering the real potential of career
advancement.
[Bill Armer]
Shifting Identities and Institutions
132
The approach I’ve taken with my PhD is to treat it like a job. My ‘jobs’ in the past
have been in the private sector and have always involved very tight deadlines to
which I would be held accountable.
[Melanie Shearn]
All of the students we spoke to while writing this book described how skills and
strategies that they had learnt from other environments could be adapted to the PhD
experience.This was often related to managing tight deadlines,working in teams,col-
laborating with others, presenting material and time management. Richard Heslop,
who is studying for a doctorate in education whilst maintaining his job as a full-time
police officer, reflects on how the two jobs are not that dissimilar:
As a police officer I have always had to be organised and methodical in my work.
In terms of my research methodology (interviews), police work certainly gives me
the interpersonal and questioning skills to make the work easier.
Richard found that alongside specific transferable skills, such as interview tech-
niques, problem-solving was often a key skill that could be applied to the PhD
process that made the current job much less stressful. Melanie Shearn found that
being able to troubleshoot and work through problems made the light at the end of
the tunnel always visible rather than sitting in the dark for days, contemplating a dif-
ficulty that generates only procrastination:
The jobs I previously held required a lot of multi-tasking, problem solving and
short deadlines. As a result I think I am far more organised now and my project
and time management skills are much more advanced … Research problems for
me are just blips that I cope with far better than I would have before my work
experience.
Often these skills are embedded in the way in which we approach tasks,understand
objectives and set out a path to achieve them.The transference of skills may be both
conscious and unconscious, but be assured that if you are approaching postgraduate
Non-traditional Routes into the PhD
133
study from a non-traditional route, then you will be bringing useful skills, strategies and
stress-busting techniques.
BOX 11.2
As with any other job, there are four major factors to consider with the PhD: pay, duties,
hours of work and job satisfaction. Consider these carefully before committing yourself
to a course of study, and involve your significant others in the deliberations. [Bill Armer]
Starting a PhD after a lengthy career elsewhere can also bring with it conflicts of inter-
ests and it may take a while for one role to be replaced by another. Ruth Bartlett was
awarded a case studentship (joint funding from a research council and another body – in
this case the ESRC and a large charitable housing organisation) after she had spent
many years as a mental health nurse working with people with dementia. Ruth’s PhD
was still to be in this area but she was now in the role of ‘researcher’ and not ‘nurse’,
which turned out to be a complex and somewhat difficult change. Ruth explains why:
As a nurse with clinical experience of working with people with dementia, in a
research environment I found myself reflecting upon my motives and position as a
doctoral researcher very early on in the study …. Having been trained to help
people with this condition in a very practical and often immediate way, some of the
comments participants made to me during the study, such as ‘so you’re here to
help yourself then, not me’, cause me to reflect upon and question the utility of
qualitative research, particularly when undertaken by doctoral students.
Shifts in identity are part of the process of moving into the researcher role and,
as Ruth experienced, this can flag up some difficult issues both emotionally and
practically.
It’s work, but not as you know It: recognising
the differences
While we want to emphasise the transferable skills that all students will have, we also
want to give a realistic perspective on the differences that students coming back into
Higher Education will face with the PhD project.The PhD can be treated like a job
in terms of how your day is structured, recognising the funding as a salary, and treating
Shifting Identities and Institutions
134
supervisors as line managers who are there to guide your project to success.Yet there
are still some intrinsic differences between mainstream work and doing a PhD because
of the nature of original and independent research.Melanie Shearn reflects on the sim-
ilarities and differences between mainstream employment and research work:
While my funding helps to give me the feeling that my PhD’s a job, and my back-
ground in freelancing means I’m used to working from home, there are down-
sides to treating it like a job. For starters, it’s far more isolating than any job I’ve
ever had. Even when I freelanced, I had contact with people who had a stake in
the project. During my PhD, I’ve found that there is nobody working on my PhD
except me – and I don’t like that: to whom am I accountable and in what way?
The isolation and loneliness that students often feel is a familiar feature of doc-
toral studies. This is in marked contrast to many other work settings where the
emphasis is on team work,or even if individual autonomy and responsibility is com-
mon, it is rarely the case to the extent it is with doctoral work that you are the sole
individual responsible for producing everything! With a PhD, the weightiness of
responsibility that the buck stops with you can be overwhelming. Melanie goes on
to offer suggestions for managing feelings of isolation:
One of the most useful things I’ve found in terms of ‘connecting’ both my project
and myself to the world is to build up a network of contacts with people working
on similar projects at other universities.
Remember that PhD topics are so specific that it is unlikely another student will
be doing an exactly similar area.This can increase feelings of isolation and highlights
why networking outside your institution is crucial.
BOX 11.3
Chapter 8 on ‘Networking’ provides strategies to deal with the isolating consequences
of independent study while Chapter 16 discusses how challenging environments can
be tackled.
Non-traditional Routes into the PhD
135
No doubt moving out of the workplace, or even reducing full-time hours to take
on a PhD part-time, will be met with jokes and jibes from colleagues and family
about how students spend hours over coffee breaks, musing in academic circles and
gently perusing the library shelves for inspiration! These are grossly inflated stereo-
types (well, 99%) as the reality of completing a huge piece of work in three years
becomes clear.Time is not a luxury in doctoral studies. Bill Armer has some words
of warning about how to manage time:
Don’t fall into the trap of muttering to yourself ‘I’ve got another three years to catch
up’ – time has a habit of eluding you. As far as possible treat your studies as a job with
a set number of hours of weekly work. Arrange a programme that suits you and
your lifestyle, but aim to work for about thirty hours a week (on a full-time basis) in
manageable blocks. An hour is probably too short to be useful, four hours may well
test your concentration to its limit or beyond. Know yourself and be realistic, but
don’t forget that, in this context, ‘work’ may consist of reading, quiet contemplation
or writing-up.
The nature of research work and what it actually means to ‘write a PhD’ can be
elusive to those doing it, let alone to those who are on the periphery peering into
the unknown world of being a PhD student. The reality will be that even when
working from home,which is a popular option these days as sometimes the environment
is preferable, those around need to be aware that you are in ‘DO NOT DISTURB’
mode. Bill Armer explains how doing a PhD in a home environment has implica-
tions for those who share your home:
Partners, children and any others who depend upon you for support will need to
accept that, just as if you had a ‘real’ job, there will be times when you are not avail-
able except in an emergency.You might be ‘only’ reading a book, or even just quietly
thinking, but impress upon them that you are not to be disturbed.
Thinking time is something that is important at all stages of the PhD, whether it
be when designing the methodology, reflecting on fieldwork or contemplating your
findings and developing new concepts.
Shifting Identities and Institutions
136
BOX 11.4
Older students often have a much more complex social network. It might not seem to be
a victory to stand upon the dais, with a newly minted PhD in hand, gazing back upon a
trail of neglected and perhaps wrecked relationships. Being older we need to take a
broader view of our situation. [Bill Armer]
Professional doctorates
There is little publicity about the non-traditional routes into doctorate education and
the opportunities of undertaking postgraduate study in the form of a professional doc-
torate. Although not available in all UK universities, this system was imported from
North America in 1992 and is favoured by disciplines and professions that are practice-
based. It is known to challenge traditional formats of the PhD because it is ‘explicitly
concerned with practical knowing and doing’ (Lester, 2004: 762). For instance, nurs-
ing (D.Nursing), social work (D.S.W.), education (Ed.D), medicine (MD), engineer-
ing (EngD) and clinical psychology (DClinPsychol) are more familiar paths for
clinicians and practitioners.At least 38 of 70 UK universities surveyed offer at least one
professional doctorate programme across 19 disciplines (Bourner et al., 2001: 67).
Known also as ‘practitioner doctorates’ (Lester, 2004: 757), these programmes offer
a general emphasis on a combination of taught courses, practice, research training and
original research, which includes a thesis of around 40,000 words (somewhat shorter
than the traditional thesis length which is around 80,000).These independent pieces
of research emerged from ‘the contexts of the academy, the profession and the work-
place or practicum’ (Lester, 2004: 758).The requirement to demonstrate independent
and critical thinking as well as make a contribution to the academic field is at the same
standard as a traditional doctorate.In no way is doing a professional doctorate a lighter
option compared to the traditional route! In fact the professional doctorate has grown
in popularity amongst university managers and educational reformists as well as stu-
dents because of the deficiencies in the traditional doctorate pathway that neither
reflects the reality of those working in practice professions but offers a more contem-
porary approach to learning and knowledge production.
BOX 11.5
If you are considering a doctorate and are already a practitioner then do explore your
options. A professional doctorate may be more appropriate to your established knowl-
edge and career path rather than the traditional route.
Non-traditional Routes into the PhD
137
The modern day approach of the professional doctorate can suit students who are
still pursuing regular jobs and combining their postgraduate studies with the
demands of everyday employment. Richard Heslop has pursued Higher Education
for the past ten years alongside full-time employment in the police force.After gain-
ing an undergraduate degree from the Open University in politics followed by a
masters and a PGCE, his new position as a police trainer developed his interest in
adult education.This led to his enrolment on a Doctor of Education programme on
a part-time basis. Richard explains the benefits of this route:
There were a number of advantages for taking the EdD over a traditional PhD.
In large part this was to do with the structured modular approach of the pro-
gramme … During the first two and a half years of my EdD I was required to
complete five taught ‘specialist’ modules from relevant masters programmes,
across the university, two had to be on research methodology. This gave me
ample opportunity to mix with and bounce my ideas off other students in the
early stages of the degree.
The taught elements of the professional doctorate can help combat some of the
perennial problems associated with independent study. Loneliness and isolation are
most easily dealt with through networking, working in small groups and sharing
ideas about research and practice. The professional doctorate specifically addresses
these difficulties providing a productive learning environment that fosters peer
support.
Key Points to Remember

Non-traditional routes in doctoral education are increasing as more older stu-
dents enter Higher Education.

Alongside age, there are particular dynamics in relation to gender, class and
ethnicity for students, so make sure you seek out advice networks and others
in similar situations.

Achieving a work-life balance is crucial if there are other people whom you have
responsibilities for. This is a point for discussion and action pre-enrolment!

Experience, skills and strategies gained from previous employment are vital
and can be transferred to managing the PhD.
Shifting Identities and Institutions
138

The PhD can be structured like a job with set hours and a familiar work structure.

The professional doctorate is a good option for those in specific practitioner-
based occupations.
SUGGESTED READING
Becker, L. (2004) How to Manage Your Distance and Open Learning Course.
Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Burgess, H., Slemnski, S. and Arthur, L. (2006) Achieving Your Doctorate in
Education. London: Sage.
Green, B., Maxwell, T.W. and Shananhan, P.J. (eds) (2001) Doctoral
Education and Professional Practice. Armidale, NSW: Kardoorair Press.
Powell, S. (2001) Returning to Study. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Rose, J. (2001) The Mature Student’s Guide to Writing. London: Palgrave.
Scott, D. (2004) Professional Doctorates: Integrating Academic and
Professional Knowledge. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Non-traditional Routes into the PhD
139
Chapter 12
Undertaking a PhD Part-time
What this Chapter Includes:

Explorations of why this is a viable route 

Questions to consider before signing up

The reality of doing a job and studying

Tips for prioritising study

Overview of competencies for postgraduate study

Time management strategies
Why part-time study?
Largely thanks to pioneers such as the Open University, which offers flexible Higher
Education to those who want to combine studies with other commitments, it is pos-
sible to study for a doctorate on a part-time basis.The Open University is renowned
for its flexibility as its ethos was built on distance learning. Making optimal use of
computer technology through e-learning websites and modes of communication,
there are many MA level distance courses that can be taken on a full- or part-time
basis across universities in the UK.In more recent years,most universities have recog-
nised that part-time study is attractive to a proportion of postgraduate students and
offer a system to accommodate this. In some disciplines, especially professional doc-
torates, part-time students are the majority. Part-time students are generally combin-
ing the research with a full-time paid job or a full-time care commitment. It may be
that studying and working simultaneously is the right choice for you, either due to
finances or because your everyday work informs your research agenda.It may be that
the PhD is part of continuing professional development and that it is an extension
of work rather than a separate entity. Either way, the part-time route presents differ-
ent obstacles than the full-time route as, after all, the doctorate system is very much
geared up to the four-year full-time completion rate (including one year’s formal
training). However, do not be put off. Claire Maxwell finished her PhD part-time
in just over five years and fully recommends combining work and independent
research:
Undertaking a PhD Part-time
141
There is no doubt that doing a PhD part-time is more challenging than doing one
full-time. But everyone has other commitments and responsibilities, so the same
principles apply to finding the right balance between completing your PhD while
meeting your other responsibilities. Despite the challenges, I don’t regret doing my
PhD part-time because it meant I developed my career at the same time, and, very
importantly, I think working also kept me sane!
It is often wise to connect your PhD topic to your everyday job because it makes
life easier. Often resources can be used from work, gatekeepers and access to research
participants are easier because of your ‘insider’ status (don’t forget there are ethical
issues with this as well), and occasionally the research can be done in work time. For
example, contributors to this book who studied part-time closely aligned their topic
with their day job. Sallyann Halliday worked as a researcher and decided to study the
contract research culture as an occupation;Richard Heslop was a trainer in the police
service and opted to study the relationship between police training and adult edu-
cation. Claire Maxwell was a social worker and went on to explore young people’s
sexual relationships.These choices make sense because there were continuities between
full-time work and part-time study.
Taking the plunge!
The motivations to do a PhD are similar for part-time as they are for full-time
students (see Chapter 1).Yet,often the decision to enrol and actually ‘take the plunge’
is the result of lots of queries and quibbles, angst and self-doubt. Sallyann Halliday
had studied for a masters part-time so was aware of the juggling act between work
and study.Yet her contemplation of doing a PhD brought renewed concerns about
how she would actually fit the study in:
There were so many concerns and thoughts going through my head, such as –
How would I fit PhD study in? Would my employer pay for it and support me?
Would I be given study leave? Actually how, in practical day-to-day, ‘get real’ terms,
I would fit it in with a busy full-time job was a worry at first. In my mind, making
sure I could balance the demands of the duties of my full-time professional posi-
tion alongside the demands of part-time doctoral study was important.
Realistically weighing up how you will squeeze this additional commitment into
your already full schedule has to be the first reality check. Frank discussions with
those at home and your employer are essential before you decide to take this task
onboard. If you will get no ‘help’, whether this is financial, study leave or resources
from your employer,then perhaps this is not the right time to take on board the chal-
lenge. Sallyann Halliday recounts how confronting her boss was a useful step in the
decision making to undertake a PhD part-time whilst still working, and was lucky
to receive full support:
When I decided that I was going to undertake a PhD, I arranged a meeting with
my boss to discuss with him how I would like to carry on with part-time study as
well as my full-time position. I received their full support in the form of payment of
fees and study leave. My boss, a Professor, was encouraging and gave wise words
of advice to me, most notably ‘it’s hard work – but worth it’.
You may not work in such a sympathetic work culture but instead one where doc-
torates are not the ordinary pathway. This may mean your negotiations are more
complex and will need thinking through.
What is important is not to have unrealistic expectations of what PhD study will
be like. Universities are traditional institutions, built on old-fashioned stereotypes of
students.Although the new universities (post 1992) will have some different approaches
to the student experience, teaching, research priorities and general philosophies,
the older universities are set up very traditionally. Some of the contributors talked of
a ‘culture shock’ when they began postgraduate study because the research culture
was a rather different culture to mainstream employment. For instance, referring
to her other employment experience, an older student and also a mother, Melanie
Shearn offers her observations on how university can have its own peculiar approach:
Coming to do my PhD at a university that caters for more ‘traditional’ work hours
and people aged around 18–21 was a bit of a culture shock. I have found that my
experiences, interests and time schedules form barriers to participation in some
activities. I also find the student–staff relationship trickier because I’m closer in age
to some of the younger staff.
Shifting Identities and Institutions
142
BOX 12.1
Many part-time doctoral students have done part-time study before. Remember that a
PhD will not be a short period of cramming that you may be familiar with after doing
a dissertation. This is a commitment that will last six years! You must be ready for the
long run.
Obvious hurdles
The experiences that part-time PhD students face are often similar to those that full-
time students experience. Concerns that have been outlined throughout the book
are all applicable to the part-time student. But there are some peculiarities that are
specifically related to part-time status. Below we discuss some of the more obvious
issues that manifest for the part-time student.
Out on a limb
Being part-time ultimately means you spend less of your working week engaged
with the institution, the work or in contact with peers in the working environment.
This may lead to feelings of displacement: that you are attached to the department
but you are removed by the limited amount of time you spend there.This can lead
to uncertainties about what you are actually meant to be doing, as you have fewer
indicators around you from peers and therefore no benchmarks for comparison.
Below, Sallyann Halliday reflects on how she was a little confused about the amount
of work she should be doing as she had no likeminded peer with whom she could
assess the pace of her work:
When I first started, I was unsure of how much work I should be doing and when.
As a part-time student, I felt a little ‘removed’ from the institutional environment. I
wondered, Am I doing enough? Have I read enough? Have I read the right things?
Am I doing what I am supposed to be? 
These kinds of question are normal for all students irrespective of their full- or
part-time status, but feeling outside the institution and out of contact with the
sources of information can provide answers to these worrying concerns. It may also
be the case that you feel you are not getting the same kind of service as full-time
Undertaking a PhD Part-time
143
counterparts or that you are not exposed to the same opportunities. Claire Maxwell
was working full-time as a social worker whilst doing her PhD, and living two hours
away from the university where she was enrolled was also a disadvantage. Claire
describes how isolation manifests itself:
The lack of connection with my university department meant I was very isolated. I
had no one to discuss issues arising out of my research or to debate new ideas
with. I felt as if I lacked the opportunity for intellectual stimulation.
Luckily, with most business conducted by email these days, you are likely to be
hooked into the opportunities that the department is offering for all students. It is also
an illusion that you are cutoff from a lively environment of solidarity and co-operation
between colleagues.PhD study is a varied entity and people are often all over the place,
doing fieldwork, teaching, working, taking time out, working at home or simply
choosing to spend less time in the department.You are probably missing out on less
than you think! In addition, the periodic monitoring and evaluation of your progress
will enable training needs to be identified and specific areas of concern to be raised
with supervisors.
Not enough hours in the day
An obvious issue, more so than for the full-time student, is that of time and juggling
the many jobs that have to fit into the day. Sally Ann Halliday reflects on how the
first year of her studies was fraught with clashes between work commitments and
supervisory meetings:
Over the past year it has been busy times at work and work has clashed with meet-
ings with supervisors. ‘Time’, I have found, without a doubt, is the biggest hurdle to
overcome. That is, making the time, then setting aside time, and then being disci-
plined to use it effectively.
Mothers who are involved in academia will no doubt particularly find the issue of
time management a struggle. Leonard (2001: 77) makes specific references to the
time issue in relation to female doctorate students, making the point that PhD study
cannot just be fitted into odd hours here and there or weekends. Study needs to be
Shifting Identities and Institutions
144
organised in concentrated chunks and preferably in a space where work can be left,
awaiting your return.
BOX 12.2
Remember and accept that most things will take you months to complete – not days or
even weeks – when you are doing a PhD part-time. [Claire Maxwell]
A different timeframe
Doing a PhD part-time means that a different timeframe is applied to the same tasks.
For instance, rather than one year for preparing the research design, literature review
and methodology, this is extended to between 18 months and 24 months. Likewise
with the fieldwork stage, the time for data collection is expanded, which can be a
disadvantage as fieldwork often relies on momentum and immersion ‘in the field’.
Claire Maxwell found that the fieldwork was particularly onerous because there was
no opportunity really to get involved and get the job done:
My data collection stretched out over 15 months, as I only had a limited amount of
time to pursue contacts and negotiate access. More importantly, at the data analysis
and writing up stage, I often found I only had the weekends, or one day to immerse
myself in my data and develop my ideas, separated by one to two weeks where
my work commitments required my full attention. This lack of opportunity to
immerse myself in the research process did leave me feeling like I was missing out
on something – but the reality of the situation was I had to work and I actually
really enjoyed that too.
Pacing yourself is something that is learnt along the way but it is a good idea to
have a clear overview of what the whole project will look like on a part-time basis.
Institutions all have their own regulations in relation to how long ‘part-time’ will
take.This is generally between five and six years. Having a clear sense of the mile-
stones you need to reach month by month can be visualised in a timetable format
spelling out the jobs to be completed each year. Milestones such as upgrades,
presenting at conferences, starting fieldwork, analysis and starting writing up can
clearly be identified over the months.
Undertaking a PhD Part-time
145
BOX 12.3
Timetabling
Timetabling activities and events is important on several levels. Think about how your
project will be managed over its whole lifecourse as well as revising and working to a
shorter timetable in between supervisions.
The reality of juggling a job with study
Above we have outlined the obvious pitfalls of taking on two jobs simultaneously, but
what are the solutions to these familiar issues? Again, we refer you to other chapters in
the book, in particular Chapter 8 on Networking, Chapter 11 on Non-Traditional
Routes, Chapter 9 on Missing the Deadline and Chapter 18 on Coping with Stress.
A useful framework of competencies has been offered by Rickards (1992: 44),
which can be applied as a set of areas to consider if embarking on part-time study:
•
Personal and life competencies (managing time, money, stress, personal relationships
and domestic management).
•
Work, study and academic competencies (managing work and study relationships),
receptive skills (reading and listening), productive skills (writing and speaking).
•
Research skills and subject competencies.
Alongside these competencies we want to emphasise some tips that have been tried
and tested by our contributors.
Prioritisation
Returning to the theme of managing different jobs at the same time, a useful principle
to organise your studies by is that of prioritisation. There will always be competing
demands in your life whether it be children, a partner, relatives, health, finances, living
arrangements, holidays, leisure, shopping, socialising – the list is endless. Each of these
life elements needs to be balanced with the tasks of the PhD, which ultimately means
prioritising different demands at different times. Sallyann Halliday summarises how she
worked out a system of prioritisation 18 months into her studies:
To overcome the barrier of finding time to study I decided to set aside at least one
day of my week to my PhD study.This is when I dedicate my whole day to doing noth-
ing else but study. There are always other things that demand my time – shopping,
sport, family and friends – but I have to be strict with myself. Even when I feel
studying should be at the bottom of my ‘to do’ list, I have to make a conscious effort
to bring it further to the top. This is not a ‘breeze’ – but reminding myself why I am
undertaking PhD study is a great way of motivating myself to get down to it.
Shifting Identities and Institutions
146
The personal compromises will come when you have to make decisions about
what to keep in your life and what to shelve or give up for a short time. For instance,
hobbies, sports, travel, socialising and additional work such as volunteering may have
to be withdrawn while you get going with your study. Doing lots of things not to
the best of your ability is often more frustrating than not doing them at all. Yet
prioritising is difficult when lots of things are important in life and demand your
attention. Claire Maxwell reflects that one of the biggest battles of managing a PhD
part-time with the rest of her life was with her own feelings of guilt:
One of the most enduring battles during my five years of doing a PhD was with
myself! I constantly struggled with myself when trying to determine how much,
if any, free time I should have every week. For instance, ‘Did I have time to go
to the gym or should I spend another hour studying?’; ‘Should I agree to go
for coffee with my friend, or should I stay at home and study?’ Everyone who
has been a student knows that feeling of guilt when you are relaxing and
not studying. I carried that feeling of guilt most of the time, but when it was
making me particularly miserable, I would just stop, give myself a break and do
something else.
The emotional roller-coaster is often more acute for the part-time student because
the job of juggling demands can become emotionally exhausting and there are times
when something has to give. Recognising when you need a break from studying, or
time out from juggling the madness, is as important as sticking to a tight timetable.
Often taking a break from studying can mean that you are fresher and more productive
when you return.
Time management
Time is a pressure for all research students.This becomes most noticeable when the
writing up stage begins and it is clear that hours in front of a computer can only pro-
duce a few hundred words of progress.Writing up also means thinking time and this
is where you will realise that a few odd hours here and there is simply not enough
to get the job done. A concentrated period of time is needed to work on writing,
editing, thinking and developing theory. Claire Maxwell offers her experience of
how she negotiated extended amounts of time from her day job to concentrate on
the writing stage:
Undertaking a PhD Part-time
147
I began to slowly build up my flexi-time hours until I had enough to take a whole
week off in one go. I tried to ensure I had one whole week off every five or six
weeks during the writing up stage to really keep the momentum going. Of course
not everyone is fortunate enough to be in such a position where they are able to
pretty much manage their own work schedule – but if you are – it can make a real
difference. If that had not been possible, I would have considered taking some
unpaid time off work during the writing up stage to keep the momentum of this
phase going without too many other pressures and interruptions.
BOX 12.4
Target setting
Set yourself ‘realistic’ targets to achieve in your doctoral study time which take account
of your personal circumstances (job, caring, family commitments). Is it realistic for you to
do a few hours a day? Or is it realistic to set aside one day a week as your ‘study day’?
Choose whichever is most practical, then you’re more likely to commit to the time slot
and stick to it. [Sallyann Halliday]
Support and networking
Seeking out mechanisms of support often falls to the responsibility of the student.
This can be done within the framework of the existing university or department, or
other networks set up regionally and nationally can be a useful source of intellectual
and emotional support. Claire Maxwell found that a specific national network that
specialised in her topic was stimulating both in terms of ideas and reassurance of the
PhD process:
I overcame the sense of isolation by joining a national postgraduate research sup-
port group for students studying adolescence, set up by the Trust for the Study of
Adolescence. Once a term they held meetings in London, where we heard presen-
tations about ‘my research’ or ‘the viva’, followed by small group discussions
exploring different stages of the research process.
Shifting Identities and Institutions
148
Other tips on networking and peer support in Chapter 8 are important as well as
recognising that your part-time status may well enhance the need for certain coping
strategies. Using your supervisor, the various programmes of training that are available
for all students, as well as occasions such as seminars, workshops and postgraduate
conferences, are important networking opportunities and a chance to ask questions
and realise that others are in the same boat.
BOX 12.5
The average number of supervisions a part-time student can expect is about five each
year. Discuss from the outset the nature of these meetings and the work expectations
around them.
Key Points to Remember

Part-time students often choose topics close to their employment interests.

Part-time study means applying a different timeframe to the tasks, which
may take months rather than weeks to complete.

Prioritising studies is an important organising principle.

Chunks of time are essential not odd hours here and there.

Having a clear timetable and set of milestones will make the years seem
more structured.

Networking is even more important to prevent negative isolation as a part-
time student.
SUGGESTED READING
De Fazio, T. (2002) Studying Part Time Without Stress. London: Allen &
Unwin.
Gatrell, C. (2006) Managing Part-Time Study. Maidenhead: Open University
Press.
Pritchard, L. with Roberts, L. (2006) The Mature Student’s Guide to Higher
Education. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Rose, J. (2001) The Mature Student’s Guide to Writing Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Undertaking a PhD Part-time
149
Chapter 13
Combining Teaching and
Doctoral Studies
What this Chapter Includes:

How teaching undergraduates fits into doing a PhD

The clear benefits of teaching to your research and career

How to prevent teaching interfering with your PhD

Dealing with ‘bad teaching days’

Effective corner-cutting that doesn’t reduce quality

Suggestions for when teaching is not available
The unsaid assumption
Over the past decade, teaching undergraduates while conducting a doctorate has
become a familiar experience.There is a ‘long established tradition of casual teach-
ing by doctoral students’ (Phillips and Pugh, 2005: 91), that means teaching is often
an expectation of departments. Now that doctorates are financially supported
through teaching bursaries or scholarships that encourage departments to provide
teaching experience as part of the award, it is rare for postgraduates not to be offered
teaching. It is not only the change in the overall philosophy of what a doctorate is
that has driven this change. With more academics holding ‘buy-outs’ from normal
duties and increasing undergraduate numbers, the demand for teaching staff is con-
siderable and many programmes, especially in research-led universities, could not run
without this contingent of casual labour that turns up every September (Holt, 1999).
Until recently,rarely has the combination of teaching and doing a PhD been reflected
upon as traditionally there has been an assumption that academics are natural teachers.
From our own experience of sitting in lectures we know this is far from the truth! There
has been a neglect of how the teaching is done because it is assumed that academics have
the expertise in the subject that will give them the skills necessary to teach. From other
quarters there have been concerns raised about ensuring that postgraduates who are
employed in Higher Education get a fair deal. Unions have got together to write the
Employed Postgraduates’ Charter (2003), which calls for some of the following rights:
Combining Teaching and Doctoral Studies
151
•
Non-discriminatory appointment procedures.
•
Written statement of terms and conditions.
•
Belonging to a trade union of choice.
•
Pay for all responsibilities and work undertaken.
•
Full departmental and institutional integration.
What has also been sidelined is the special relationships between postgraduates
teaching undergraduates, which is different from when full-time members of the
academic teaching staff are conversing with students.Teaching when you are a post-
graduate brings with it a set of dynamics that are complex. If postgraduates have only
recently finished their undergraduate studies there are issues of role conflict as well as
concerns that the teacher is virtually the same age as the students.Whatever age you
start teaching it can be daunting, and this is not always appreciated.At the minimum,
institutions should offer basic training in teaching methods and assessment for
instance, as well as regular feedback and support sessions.We are aware that this is not
generally the case. From a study of postgraduate teachers at the University of Otago,
New Zealand, the vast majority of interviewees (71%) reported no formal training
(Harland and Plangger, 2004: 76).This is despite evidence from 22 universities in the
UK that training university teachers increased the extent to which the teacher adopts
a student focus teaching style, improving the outcomes for the students (Gibbs and
Coffey, 2004).
There have been concerns raised by the Higher Education Academy and the gov-
ernment about the need to ensure that postgraduates who are teaching are fully
trained.The Government White Paper The Future of Higher Education stated that all
new teaching staff should receive accredited training by 2006 (Department for
Education and Skills, 2003: 46).To support this aim, a set of professional standards was
introduced in 2006 (The UK Professional Standards Framework for Supporting
Teaching and Learning in Higher Education), which emphasises a high quality
student learning experience and the professional development of staff engaged in
teaching.To achieve this at the University of Leeds, postgraduate students who teach
in their second year are offered a course called the ‘Modules in Learning and Teaching
in Higher Education for Postgraduates and other Part Time Teachers’ (NDTHLE),
which consists of workshops, peer observation, assessed work and mentoring.
BOX 13.1
The whole teaching experience can be considered
in four ways:
•
The training
•
Preparation
•
The delivery
•
Career development
What is teaching?
There are a plethora of different teaching tasks that postgraduates are asked to undertake.
This can range from laboratory demonstrations, one-to-one supervision of dissertations
and project work,assisting in IT or study skills workshops,or even giving a lecture.Most
often,students are needed to conduct seminar or tutorial work.Modules normally oper-
ate with a one hour lecture each week given by the module convenor (usually a full-
time academic) and then a one-hour tutorial that accompanies the topic. The
postgraduate-teacher organises and delivers the tutorial aimed at dissecting the topic
to get students to think more critically about the issue. John Roberts explains what
this actually entails:
In the social sciences and humanities you will probably be asked to teach first year
seminars. Seminars are structured around a set of key readings. Obviously you must
complete this reading. From this reading you should be able to gain a list of questions to
ask the students during the seminar. Or from the reading you might think of a number of
examples from everyday life that will illustrate points from the main reading.
Increasingly, first year teaching is returning to some basic study skills such as essay
writing, presentation skills, referencing and bibliographies (students get this wrong
no matter how many times they are told!).You may be required to teach some of
these formally but if not you can always integrate them into your tutorials.
Whether you are teaching a subject on which you consider yourself a bit of an
expert, or whether it is all new material, getting some guidance and direction before
you start is essential.This should be formalised, although John Roberts reflects how
sometimes postgraduate teaching staff are overlooked:
When I started teaching as a postgraduate student at universities no full-time aca-
demic member of staff ever took me to one side to tell me how to teach or how to
mark. Somehow you are supposed to miraculously know how to do both. Be pre-
pared for this and realise that you are doing the department a favour as much as
they are doing you a favour.
It is important to be clear from the start what your role is and where the bound-
aries are drawn. Check what your contract states and if you are not happy with the
workload or expected duties then see if this can be negotiated. Morss and Murray
(2005: 3) outline what is not the responsibility of the teaching assistant:
Shifting Identities and Institutions
152
•
To read every paper on the topic.
•
To design the curriculum.
•
To write or re-write the syllabus.
•
To take responsibility for the students.
•
To design assessments.
BOX 13.2
Training to teach is essential
If training is not offered then demand it! If it is offered make sure you are paid for under-
taking it.
Whether you are on a teaching bursary or taking on casual teaching duties,
Phillips and Pugh (2005: 92) suggest good practice is to obtain a letter of appoint-
ment which specifies the tasks and hourly rates.Teaching bursaries may hold special
‘Terms and Conditions’ from the university which are different for those for taking
on casual teaching. These differ widely between universities and departments so
check what they are before you sign up. JK Tina Basi, who taught throughout her
four years as a PhD student, suggests all postgraduate teachers clarify their role by
asking some of these questions:
Will you have flexibility over what to teach? What will the marking consist of? Will
you need to set open door hours or attend lectures? How much administrative
work is required? Will you need to take staff training courses? How often, if at all,
will you meet the module convenor or other Teaching Assistants? It is important
that you get the answers to your questions earlier rather than later.
Also,make sure you are aware of the number of hours you will be expected to teach.
The National Postgraduate Committee guidelines suggests no more than six hours per
week per semester.The research councils suggest very similar teaching loads.
So, what’s in it for me?
Let’s be honest, one of the main motivating factors for teaching is the cash (this may
transfer into fees or a scholarship)! Casual staff in universities are paid decent money,
and marking essays and exams is usually paid per script. But there are also positive
Combining Teaching and Doctoral Studies
153
reasons for teaching that spread beyond a solution for the cash-flow problem.There are
other academic-related benefits that should convince you that taking on a teaching
load is worth it.Yousaf Ibrahim experienced teaching as an essential part of the PhD
process:
Right from the outset teaching has been a major advantage for me during the PhD
process in three ways: access to resources and funding; confidence building,
especially when deciding on your PhD topic; and acquiring knowledge through
teaching, which informed my research and by undertaking research I developed
my own specialism in teaching – in effect a virtuous cycle.
There are some specific advantages to teaching undergraduates that can assist you
in your theoretical development for the thesis. In addition, you can make clear links
between your own research and teaching.These points will be explored below.
Reading the classics
Teela Sanders, who has responsibility for managing teaching assistants, notes how
many students reflect time after time that even though it was sometimes a bind,
teaching actually took them back to the reading they should have done at the begin-
ning of the doctorate. If we have been studying a discipline for several years before
we even come to the doctorate, we can have quite a jaded relationship with the
‘founding fathers’ of the discipline. However, whether we like it or not these texts
are integral to understanding the wider context of your study area and revisiting
them in order to teach elementary theories and concepts can be a blessing in dis-
guise. JK Tina Basi describes how returning to core textbooks and original manu-
scripts that could be considered a chore was turned into a positive contribution to
the PhD:
Teaching first year students in what amounts to the basics of your discipline is not
only a good refresher and reminder of how your work can contribute overall to the
academy, but the experience feeds into your own research in unexpected and
exciting ways. Students bring a fresh approach to theories that might appear stale
and insufficient in your own research and will often ask questions that push you to
think laterally around your own subject area.
Shifting Identities and Institutions
154
BOX 13.3
Use the undergraduate reading lists to start the PhD literature review. Getting back to
the classics can be a real eye opener and lead your thinking in new directions.
Enhancing the research
The skills that can be developed through teaching (both those acquired from train-
ing and those natural skills that are developed) are transferable to many aspects of the
PhD process.For instance,talking confidently to a group of people is a necessary part
of presenting a paper at a conference or conducting fieldwork.Also, learning how to
answer questions that are thrown at you and being able to ‘think on your feet’ is
another good skill to learn in preparation for presentations and the viva. Robertson
and Bond (2001) make the point that research informs teaching while at the same
time teaching becomes a channel for knowledge transfer.Yousaf Ibrahim found clear
crossovers between his empirical data collection and teaching:
As soon as I started to carry out my research I found clear links between this and
the subjects I was teaching. Having carried out fieldwork I was able to share real
empirical experience with students on a whole range of issues associated with
strategy, design and implementation.This gave added value to my teaching. It also
worked the other way round, my teaching informed my research objectives and
questions.
Other skills you develop whilst teaching undergraduates can be more directly rel-
evant to gathering data and conducting fieldwork. Marta Bolognani, who was con-
ducting an ethnographic anthropological study, makes this clear:
Group work in the tutorials helped me to develop skills that I implemented when
running focus groups for my fieldwork. One of the most rewarding experiences I
went through was negotiating to run focus groups in a secondary school. By
taking advantage of my experience in teaching I was able to strike a deal with the
teachers: I would run one-hour revision for the class and they would take part in a
one-hour focus group.There I implemented group work strategies that I had devel-
oped through my teaching experience.
Combining Teaching and Doctoral Studies
155
BOX 13.4
Use your own examples from research and student life in your teaching. Talking about
yourself is useful for the listeners too!
Access to resources
When you register for a doctorate you have a specific student contract with the uni-
versity, whereas when you take on a teaching contract (even if casual) you become a
member of staff.Although this does not mean you have full entitlements like other
full-time staff, it certainly can provide a welcome route to resources that are other-
wise a financial burden for a student.Yousaf Ibrahim describes how taking on a dual
role in the department has hidden benefits:
As a member of staff I had access to many resources. I had, at least some of the
time, office space, a desk, telephone, Internet and e-mail access. I had access to
library books, journal articles with a longer loan period and a generous photocopying
allowance. Having regular contact with colleagues who had been through the PhD
process, especially the viva, was an important communication line to pass on
important advice.
Career development
If you have dreams of becoming a fully fledged member of the academy after your
doctorate, then you cannot escape teaching. Nor should you want to as teaching,
research and writing are intricately linked. Such a relationship allegedly has Harvard
professors fighting to get onto the first year teaching timetable.The point is, teaching
is necessary for your CV and if you can teach at least first years (with experience you
could progress to other levels),then you have secured a decent reference from a senior
member of staff who can testify your teaching proficiency.Indeed,by the time you apply
for jobs you may well have some snazzy module outlines sitting on your PC ready to
be rolled out in the next academic year. However, in the mass education system that is
Higher Education, be prepared to be accountable.Your teaching is evaluated by the
following methods:
•
Student evaluation questionnaires.
•
Peer observation and feedback from mentor.
•
Marking is ‘second’ marked by another member of staff.
Shifting Identities and Institutions
156
In the age where undergraduates are paying fees to be taught,the quality of teaching
and accountability of those who provide it will only increase. However, this is all about
developing the skill of ‘knowledge transfer’. It is useful to see teaching as part of the
postgraduate experience as you are both a developing ‘expert’ yet remain a ‘learner’
(Harland and Plangger, 2004: 78). Drawing on experiences of postgraduate teachers,
Harland and Plangger (2004: 81) describe a range of identities experienced during
the role as individuals move between ‘students, learners, teachers, researchers or aca-
demics’, likening the experience to one of being a chameleon.
BOX 13.5
Teaching experience is essential for your CV if you want to apply for an academic post.
And the catch is?
With all opportunities there are drawbacks that could make the progression of your
PhD frustrating. Inevitably while you are spending time on preparing and delivering
teaching you are not reading that article or writing that next chapter.This section
will explore how teaching can interfere with the PhD and provides tips to steer you
away from this familiar concern.
Interference with the PhD
Reflecting on several years of teaching whilst completing the PhD, John Roberts
explains how hours designated to teaching can leak into days and suddenly you have
lost considerable PhD time:
Just teaching one seminar at, say, midday, can lead to a substantial amount of time
away from PhD research. First there is the build up to teaching the seminar – making
sure you have your notes on the subject, the questions you want to ask, and so on.
Second, there is the actual teaching of the seminar. And finally the time afterwards in
which you want to wind down after teaching by taking an extended lunch break! 
Above we see some very realistic concerns outlined where teaching can end up being
the sole focus of the week,relegating the PhD to evenings and weekends.If this happens
the balance needs to be turned around, so that while you are still engaged in teaching,
your doctorate is at the forefront of your energies. It’s a difficult juggling act. However,
Combining Teaching and Doctoral Studies
157
the answers lie mainly with time management (there are always in-house courses on this
for postgraduates, so if you think this is an issue – don’t be shy). JK Tina Basi advises
against getting over-enthusiastic about planning and preparation:
Your first concern in balancing teaching and doctoral studies will be in time man-
agement. It is very easy to get excited and energetic about creating and design-
ing activities that will stimulate students. It is very important that teaching doesn’t
begin to become more of a focus than your own research so it’s best to set aside
some time during the week for preparation and administration and do your best not
to go over that time.
BOX 13.6
To minimise the amount of time spent teaching, pack all of your teaching into one day
so that you can devote as many full and clear days as possible to your PhD research.
A bad teaching day
You will almost certainly experience a ‘bad teaching day’, when no one turns up, or
if they do they look at you as if you are an alien, or you end up speaking till you are
hoarse because your students are doing a great impression of a silent movie! It is all
just part of the ebb and flow of the teaching experience. If you have followed advice
you will have some tricks up your sleeve to prevent the deadly silence, but even to
the most experienced, sometimes teaching is difficult and stressful. JK Tina Basi
shares some of her more stressful moments, suggesting this is far from unusual:
It is totally normal to have a bad teaching session when students have not done
the reading and do not feel like speaking, or when everyone feels like speaking
and the situation feels out of control. It is important to remember that it is not a
reflection of how well you know the material or how good you are at teaching. Just
remember that everyone has bad days, including students. Don’t be surprised if
you need a shoulder to cry on on more than one occasion.
Teaching is a responsible job and can sometimes be overwhelming – so when
you feel like drowning your sorrows or indulging in self-pity, make sure you speak to
your peers as they will all have had the same experience. Just remember the satisfaction
Shifting Identities and Institutions
158
should outweigh the stressful, emotional aspect of teaching, you may not think so
immediately, but in time it will prove to have been worth it.
BOX 13.7
To prevent deathly silence in tutorials, always have some pre-planned exercises for the
class. This could be study skills or newspaper-based work.
Effective corner-cutting strategies
Our contributors,three of whom were still in the throes of teaching whilst doing their
doctorates when they wrote these pieces, can offer some teaching tips for those who
are about to get involved with juggling the two jobs of teaching and researching.
Beware Not to Over-Prepare
When faced with a huge reading list, a room full of eager undergraduates, or a the-
orist to explain whom you have never heard of, there is a great tendency to spend
several days reading all you can in order to feel you can get through a 45-
minute seminar. Hold your horses! Spending too much time preparing makes this
whole endeavour financially inefficient and interferes with the flow of your PhD.
Learning how to prepare enough in the minimum amount of time is the primary
skill you need to perfect.John Roberts and Yousaf Ibrahim offer some advice on how
to prepare efficiently and still feel confident about the quality of your teaching:
The main point to remember in order to save you too much work is try to think of
how you can prepare well for the seminar without having to do too much back-
ground reading. This is all the more important once you realise that many seminar
topics that you will have to teach will be areas that you may not be too familiar with.
[John Roberts]
I made sure I ring-fenced and protected my time. The days for preparation of
teaching, associated administration and research should be kept separate. Draw
up a timetable and commit so many hours to teaching preparation. Remember
though too much research and no social contact with neither students nor col-
leagues can be very isolating, and too much teaching and not enough research on
your PhD can cause panic and anxiety in the sense that you feel you are not get-
ting on with your own work.
[Yousaf Ibrahim]
Combining Teaching and Doctoral Studies
159
Your preparation not only means learning the topic so you feel confident enough
to summarise what was in the lecture and spark debate.You need to think about
strategies to get the students talking, as you are the facilitator of their learning. John
Roberts offers some simple, but effective strategies:
One good strategy to achieve this is to place the emphasis upon the students. For
example, I sometimes used to get students into groups, give them some questions
for discussion about a particular reading, and then have a wider discussion at
the end.
Repetition is a useful tool to cut down on preparation time. JK Tina Basi sum-
marises how the main goal of the seminars is for the students to do the work, while
you act as a mindful shepherd(ess) guiding them through the pastures:
A top tip in combining teaching and doctoral studies is to prepare one semi-
nar or tutorial and repeat it for all of your groups. Try not to do all the work
and get your students involved by having them sign up to do presentations –
it ensures their presence and participation in class. Above all remember
that you are not there to provide them with a lecture or do their reading for
them – you are there to stimulate and manage a group discussion. They need
to meet you half way!
BOX 13.8
Be prepared to say ‘NO’ to extra work that you deem unfair or outside your agreed
contract.
Marking – get it out of the way
Marking can sometimes be more stressful than actually taking the seminars as you
are making a judgement on someone’s piece of work which could affect their final
degree classification.Remember that you have to be accountable,which is why there
are guidelines for all assessors and an in-house and external marking process to make
Shifting Identities and Institutions
160
sure there are no anomalies. Again, get guidance from the module convenor and
peers as to the best strategy to mark accurately and effectively. Often marking has to
fit to tight deadlines, so putting it off should not be an option. John Roberts explains
the process in more depth:
Marking coursework can take a few days, especially when marking batches of first
year essays, as these comprise the largest number of students in a degree
scheme. Even though marking may seem a somewhat laborious task it is best to
get them marked and returned as soon as possible. Each department should have
its own guidelines about what constitutes a First, a 2.1, 2.2, and so on. Work from
these guidelines because students would most likely have read them as well and
so will write essays accordingly.
Be careful not to get roped into looking at drafts of work, or spending so much
time with students that you have co-written the essay. Students can sometimes be
persistent, so have clear boundaries in terms of how much time you will spend
advising individual students.
What if teaching is not available?
Sometimes teaching may not be available to you, but you may feel that you want this
experience for career development reasons. Here are a few options:
If you can’t do any teaching in your Department and you are interested in
experiencing teaching young people, see if the local council runs mentoring
schemes or check on the ESRC website whether they would support you as a
‘Researcher in Residence’ in a secondary school or 6th form college.
[Marta Bolognani]
The Open University are always looking for Associate Lecturers to run their
distance learning courses. This teaching is slightly different from the conventional
university style as it involves marking essays, running a handful of tutorials
throughout the course and assisting students, normally via the telephone or email.
It is worth putting in an application a year before you want to teach just so you are
on the books. (See www.openuniversity.ac.uk)
[Teela Sanders] 
Combining Teaching and Doctoral Studies
161
Key Points to Remember

Check opportunities for teaching before you register, or if you are funded
through a teaching bursary then check the terms and conditions. Always
clarify the teaching role whatever your status.

Think beyond the payslip. There are real benefits to teaching in terms of
helping to develop your research, thesis and thinking.

Make links between your own research experience and teaching, keeping
it fresh and offering real examples to undergraduates.

If you want to apply for an academic post, then teaching is essential on
your CV.

Teaching is a skill and you need training and support.

Don’t let teaching take over your week or your PhD. Be strict with timetabling
and ring-fence your preparation time.

Enjoy your contact with students – passing on knowledge is a privilege and
fun. After all, everyone remembers a good teacher.
SUGGESTED READING
Harland, T. and Plangger, G. (2004) ‘The postgraduate chameleon’, Active
Learning in Higher Education, 5 (1): 73–86.
Morss, K. and Murray, R. (2005) Teaching at University: A Guide for
Postgraduates and Researchers. London: Sage.
Shifting Identities and Institutions
162
Chapter 14
Reconciling the Research Role
with the Personal
What this Chapter Includes:

Doctoral research and the ‘personal’

Biography, lived experiences and the personal as research

Emotions and doing research

Emotions in the field

Emotional responses throughout the research process

Being aware of and managing your emotions
Doctoral research and the 'personal'
This chapter explores the doctoral process as an emotional and personal experience.
We seek to take a more holistic view of research students who make an emotional and
personal investment in their research project.We look at the converging relationships
between your research and the rest of your life as well as some aspects of tension, stress
and conflict. Many advice and guidance books recognise that doctoral research not
only involves personal motivations and investments but also requires managing your
approach to your study in a proactive way and in ways that support your other per-
sonal aspirations, well-being and commitments. Hence, doctoral study guides discuss
strategies for time management, generating a research–home balance and being aware
of your personal well-being beyond your research aspirations (see Wilkinson, 2005;
Wisker, 2001). Many have remarked that succeeding in completing your PhD will
inevitably involve a journey of ‘peaks and troughs’,‘highs and lows’ as well as sacrifice,
discipline, persistence, hard work and effort on your part (Phillips and Pugh, 2005).
Viewing the research student as an emotional being immersed in wider social rela-
tionships is rarely apparent in research method discussions. Guidelines for research
conduct and methods can be aimed at a rather one-dimensional ‘researcher’ – devoid
of multiple life roles, experiences and priorities.This can be due to adherence to a
theoretical or ‘scientific’ approach that seeks to establish a purely rational and ‘objec-
tive’ stance towards knowledge production, but it is also because personal emotions
and our lives outside of the ‘research role’ are viewed as a private and individual
matter – something for discussion between peers, family members or friends rather
than for public inquiry or institutional intervention. While we are not seeking to
provide a stance on such issues, here we are concerned to give space and recognition
to the connections between our wider selves (as more than analytical beings or full-
time researchers), lives and relationships for two reasons. First, because it is across
these multiple spheres that we live, and events, relationships and routines in everyday
life shape the nitty-gritty of everyday research practice. Secondly, because for research
students, undertaking an apprenticeship, it is perhaps even more vital and pertinent
to be aware of their emotional inner world and seek to manage this interface in ways
that aid personal development and research progress. Because of the significance of
the tensions and transgressions between our ‘personal lives’ and the research endeav-
our, we have made similar points in other chapters in this book, especially in this
present section and in Part IV, which follows, including discussions on doing a PhD
as part of a career change, undertaking a PhD part-time and juggling doctoral
research with caring commitments.
There are five aspects of this more embedded, personalised and holistic view of
the doctorate process and student. First, as we discussed in Chapter 1, undertaking
a PhD arises out of personal motivations and investments whether these involve
aspirations for an ongoing academic career or a more personal intellectual curios-
ity. Secondly, you will be immersed in and have to engage with the personal moti-
vations and micro-level ‘emotions’ of your institutional and disciplinary
relationships. Thirdly, research demands you invest yourself in the process. It is an
intensely personal endeavour as a researcher is not just an analytical person, but has
their own hopes and fears. Much of what you do as a researcher involves present-
ing oneself in particular ways and proactively shaping the research. Research
involves engagement at an intellectual level as well as in an emotional and personal
capacity.You may expect yourself to give a high level of commitment and others,
such as your supervisors, will certainly communicate such expectations to you also.
Such absorption can be very consuming and ultimately rewarding in the event of
completing your research and gaining the doctorate. However, even if we so
desired, most of us do not live in a world where we can isolate ourselves for the
duration of our study! Not only will the everyday experience of doing a PhD be
a personally and emotionally engaging experience, your research pre-occupations
and roles are likely to have an impact on those you are close to and other spheres
of your life – as well as these spheres and others having an impact on you as a
researcher.
Fourthly,undertaking doctoral research is becoming more about ongoing personal
development and career progression. Again the specific types of skills and orienta-
tions you wish to develop will be highly individualistic as you will be building on
your prior capacities and aiming to achieve new skills suitable to your future plans.
Lastly, these aspects of the research process can actually form the central part of your
analytical inquiries – as is the case within autobiographical or reflexively driven
research approaches.
Shifting Identities and Institutions
164
Biography, lived experiences and the personal as research
These five aspects demonstrating the embedded and personal nature of the doctoral
experience and endeavour were illuminated by our case study contributors. Many
demonstrated how their research interests had emerged from their own experiences
as an ongoing part of their ‘life projects’. Our previous life experiences and attitudes
can often stimulate our interest in specific research areas.Within the social sciences
it is common for our personal experiences to motivate us towards looking at partic-
ular areas as substantive research issues.This can provide much motivation but will
also mean that your connections to the subject are complex and multifaceted.Taking
a critical stance you will need to think through your prior knowledge, assumptions,
values and feelings on the subject. For example, Sonali Shah felt her PhD topic on
disabled women ‘high flyers’ expressed her own political and social concerns and
beliefs as well as her own aspirations towards an academic career. Her intellectual
endeavours were a deeply personal matter:
The experiences of myself, of friends and of other disabled people working against
disabling barriers within a mainstream society motivated me to do research in this
area. I was eager to develop work that reflected my personal belief that every
person has the right to their freedom to make personal choices, in accordance
with their personal credentials, and not to be stereotyped in any way. The PhD
experience was not only the key to the start of a successful career in academia, it
was key for a happy and successful life.
Your research questions and activities may not arise directly from your own per-
sonal experiences – and they may then further inform your life interests and out-
look. Not only will your research activities have an impact on you, the demands of
your research will need to be balanced against other life commitments. Claire
Maxwell, for example, discusses her need to study her PhD part-time while also
developing her career as a social worker:
Studying part-time was the only option for me as I wanted to work as a social
worker. Furthermore, I needed to earn money to cover my living expenses no
matter what. At this point in time, my commitment lay in developing a career as a
social worker, with the PhD almost occupying the space of a pastime.
The Research Role and the Personal
165
BOX 14.1
What kind of life project would PhD research be for you?
Being aware of what investments you are willing and able to make into your doctoral
research may help reveal your expectations, competing commitments and motivations.
Ask yourself:
•
What are your reasons for doing a PhD? 
•
How you expect your PhD research to impact on the rest of your life? 
•
What is the right kind of balance between doing the PhD and the rest of your life that
you wish to achieve?
Some methodological approaches demand more of a critical reflexivity among
researchers, where you reflect on and analyse your role in shaping and framing your
research. For example, you could be undertaking research with a concern to explicitly
analyse the role of the researcher within the research process, such as the role of the
researcher’s values and assumptions about human behaviour or social relations that
emerge from the researcher’s own biographical experiences. Reflecting on your par-
ticular input into the research process will be important here.The researcher extends
the analysis towards their own inner worlds using techniques to note down, capture
and think through emotions and identifications with your research area (see Ribbens
and Edwards, 1998; Letherby, 2003).
BOX 14.2
Think about the relationship between your wider life experi-
ences and your research activities/topic
These questions may help:
•
Are there some overlaps and what are the implications of these? 
•
What prior knowledge and experience do you have in relation to your research topic? 
•
Will you analyse your experiences and viewpoints as part of your research method-
ology? Why would this be worthwhile or necessary?
There could be several points of tension as well as convergence between your roles
as a researcher, research student and the rest of your life.Tensions between your PhD
and the rest of your life can be of a practical, emotional, ethical or intellectual nature.
It may be helpful for you to consider how your commitment to your research pro-
ject will be balanced against your other commitments. On the other side of the coin,
what you bring to your studies, and your prior values, beliefs and orientations in
Shifting Identities and Institutions
166
undertaking research will also play a part in determining your PhD experience. In
moving your research forward and balancing your multiple commitments, there is
much room for conflict but also personal transformation and development.
Claire Maxwell decided to change her PhD topic because her area was personally
challenging and her interests in her subject changed towards a new area:
As I began specialising in the study of violence against women I suspected that I
would ‘end up’ working for an organisation that campaigned in this field and won-
dered whether, despite my commitment to this area, this might potentially limit my
future career options. Also, people’s anxiety and inability to talk about (sexual) vio-
lence as well as my time at the Rape Crisis and Sexual Abuse Centre made me
realise that when working in this field, the political is personal and it becomes part
of who you are and how people see you. Emotionally I was not sure whether I had
the energy or wanted to wear my feminist principles on my sleeve at all times,
which I felt I would have to if I worked in this field. Further, after having worked with
young people as a social worker for over a year, I had become more and more
interested in the world of youth.
On the other hand, Sonali Shah notes that she developed many personal skills
while undertaking PhD research, including ‘endurance, persistence and standing up
for [her] own rights to institutional support as a disabled student’: ‘The five years I
spent working on my PhD has proved to be a crucial period of personal development
for me. It has taken me into new avenues of competence, and exposed me to great
inspirations.’ Doing a doctorate is not a cut and dry analytical or intellectual endeav-
our.You will learn new things about yourself and your capacities (or even limits!). It
is a personal journey as much as an intellectual one.
Emotions and doing research
In examining the role played by our emotional inner worlds in the research process,
we will now look at three features – emotions in the field, emotional investments
and emotional responses.The subsequent section then explores possibilities for man-
aging and coping with these emotional sides of the research process.
Emotions in the field
Embarking on fieldwork and engaging in relationships with others outside of the
world of research or university life can bring about many issues and circumstances
that simply cannot be planned or prepared for.Fieldwork relationships,perhaps more
The Research Role and the Personal
167
pronounced in qualitative research approaches, involve meeting real people and
engaging with them.You will be faced with your own emotional responses as well
as the emotional needs and responses of others. The contributors to this book
described both negative and positive emotional reactions and situations emerging
from their fieldwork experiences.As previously discussed, Ruth Bartlett felt empathy
with the welfare and service needs of her interviewees, who were older people with
dementia. She felt torn between her emotional and health professional reactions to
her clients’ stories of their care needs and experiences, while also recognising the
limitations of her capacities to help within her researcher role. Further, Ruth felt
concerned about the emotional implications of her research methods,using in-depth
interviews, on the research participants, who may rarely be asked such personally
revealing questions for research purposes. Qualitative interviewing is hence an
intensely demanding process for researcher and interviewee. As we reviewed in
Chapters 2 and 4, it is important to think through the likely emotional and personal
impact of your research methods on your participants and check out possible avenues
for providing information on professional support services if difficult memories or
emotions arise for the interviewee or yourself.
Other contributors described their attachment to the fieldwork experience and
interactions with real life experiences. Sonali Shah felt inspired and in awe of her
research participants: ‘Although the PhD work was demanding, and challenging,
often leaving me exhausted, frustrated and wanting to quit, I was greatly inspired by
the disabled high-flyers who participated in my study.’ Below and elsewhere in this
volume (especially in Part IV) we consider the significance of seeking support
for dealing with and recognising the legitimacy of such emotional experiences.
Undertaking fieldwork can be a time when a researcher feels quite alone, needing to
think for themselves and on their feet, away from their supervisor or peers. Rebecca
Mallett warns against dismissing worries, as thinking these through and sharing them
may help you to progress and learn:
Like all postgraduates ‘in the field’, I was left to my own devices but my devices were
not capable of coping. I felt under immense pressure not to admit this and not to ask
for advice and support. A mistake I would not encourage anyone else to make.
Emotional responses throughout the research process
We found that several of our contributors referred to a wide range of emotions such
as anxiety, fear, excitement, panic, shame and pride – several of which have been
raised in earlier chapters. For example, common sources of anxiety could be:
•
Presenting your ideas to supervisors, higher status academics or large audiences.
•
Contemplating a change in method or topic.
Shifting Identities and Institutions
168
•
Negotiating the terms of fieldwork with outside individuals or organisations.
•
Networking.
•
Monitoring progress.
•
Undertaking a task for the first time.
•
Seeking advice and supervision.
Starting out as a doctoral research student can particularly be a time of personal
transition, involving uncertainty and shaky self-confidence. It is an academic appren-
ticeship, and it is not surprising to feel a lack of confidence at the beginning stages
of a learning process. Harriet Churchill felt she was not a traditional PhD student,
having returned to Higher Education after several years looking after her young
daughter full-time:
I experienced the first year of doctoral research as a time of much self-doubt and
uncertainty. Re-reading my personal journal at this time, there are many refer-
ences to uncertainty about my own competence as a researcher/academic. I felt
unsure if I would be able to generate an adequate study against the benchmark of
‘originality’ and very uncertain about what my focus would be. These perceptions
were extremely anxiety-provoking. I perceived others to be much more competent
than myself. My emotions led me to feel quite nervous about seeing supervisors.
The importance of this example is the way that emotions played a powerful role in
how Harriet proceeded in her research and relationship with supervisors. Further, her
inner world tended to involve perceptions of inadequacy that led to her feeling vul-
nerable and isolated. In this example, anxiety can become ‘disabling and contribute to
a self-fulfilling cycle of victim status’ (Morley, 1999).An alternative view (albeit a very
rational one in the face of powerful emotions and self-perceptions) of these difficulties
could be to contemplate that such uncertainty,vulnerability and anxiety is very common
in the initial stages of the research process. Rather than a sign of personal adequacy,
starting out as a doctoral student may involve common experiences of anxiety over
competence and progression. Acknowledging the areas and activities where you feel
less competent can be an empowering process that can lead to the identification of
research training needs. Uncertainty and self-doubt could lead to constructively
reviewing one’s need for development, one’s task at hand and seeking support through
training, practice, mentoring or gaining resources (Morley, 1999). Thinking about
activities that trigger feelings of self-doubt and anxiety as potential areas for develop-
ment can help you regain some control over your emotional reactions.
Dealing with the unexpected and working out appropriate ways to alter your
research plans when the need arises can also be a common source of discomfort.
Many doctoral students are just as vulnerable to the fears of failure and worries about
The Research Role and the Personal
169
progress that the general population may have in relation to their goals.The early
stages of designing your research can particularly be hampered by a fear of develop-
ing a ‘good and original proposal’ as we saw in Chapter 2. Having to change your
plans is likely to illustrate a close engagement with your progress, rather than failure.
Changes can demonstrate flexibility and adaptation as you respond to dilemmas and
constraints. Moving forward with a sense of uncertainty can be uncomfortable but
adapting your plans in ways that enhance your chances of success and contribution
can be viewed in quite positive ways.
Another common experience, especially in the latter part of doctoral studies, is
feeling study fatigue. As an intellectual exercise and the largest thesis you are likely
to submit for an examination, your PhD will inevitably be draining particularly in
times of meeting deadlines or progressing towards completion. It is common for
supervisors to demand students spend long hours on their studies at this point. Even
if this is practical, you will feel drained and will need to think through how to sus-
tain your energy and motivation.
Managing your emotions
The literature on personal well-being strategies for doctoral students discusses strate-
gies for getting by and getting through the ‘hard times’ as well as attempting to
achieve ‘the right balance’ between research and the rest of your life/your personal
well-being (Howard et al., 2002;Wisker, 2004). Many of our contributors discussed
several possible ways to overcome challenging times.A common issue was regret at
‘keeping it all bottled up’ which sustained a sense of isolation but also made students
vulnerable to much internal anxiety, draining their energy and blocking progress.
Others refer to the value of taking a break and talking things through with peers and
friends. Box 14.3 begins to explore some valued options for generating awareness
and overcoming problems.The following chapters in Part IV now turn to focus on
the central importance of seeking appropriate and useful support.
Box 14.3
Emotional awareness and management
Strategies for gaining emotional awareness and enhancing your capacities to manage
emotional reactions within the field and the research process could include:
•
Regular reflection on your research activities and responses within discussions with
your supervisor, your peers or in a written format in a research diary or log.
•
Assessing your likes and dislikes, fears and hopes within the research process and
as a critical component of research planning and design.This assessment could lead
you to identify anxiety-provoking situations for you and possible ways of developing/
preparing your skills and approach.
Shifting Identities and Institutions
170
(Continued)
•
Asking others for advice and real-life examples of how they experience and respond
to emotional aspects of the research process.
•
Be prepared for your research to impact on yourself and your life in a multiplicity of
ways.
•
Be honest about your limitations and learn to say ‘No’ if necessary!
•
Be sensitive and informed about the political and ethical nature of research.
•
Try not to let your research activities damage your health, well-being or personal
relationships!
•
Recognise when you need support and advice and be determined to seek out the
right support for you.
Key Points to Remember

Doctoral research involves a personal experience that can include competing
commitments as well as wider life transformations.

You may have several prior assumptions and viewpoints on your research topic
due to your previous life experiences.

You may consider a research methodology that seeks to analyse your personal
experiences and responses to your research activities.

Thinking about how your doctoral studies relate to the rest of your life may help
you to manage the process and plan your time.

Thinking through the impact your studies have on your life may help you to recog-
nise the connections between your doctoral research and your personal life.
SUGGESTED READING
Cryer, P. (2000) The Research Student’s Guide to Success, 2nd edn.
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Etherington, K. (2004) Becoming a Reflexive Researcher: Using Ourselves in
Research. London: Jessica Kingsley.
Hockey, J. (1994) ‘New territories: problems of adjusting to the first year of a
social science PhD’, Studies in Higher Education, 19(2): 177–190.
Marshall, S. and Green, N. (2004) Your PhD Companion. Oxford: How To
Books.
Murray, R. (2002) How to Write a Thesis. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
The Research Role and the Personal
171
Part IV
Relationships of Support
This final section focuses on the emotional journey of the PhD process by recognising
the need for support and indicating some useful strategies for finding and nurturing
those relationships. This aspect of the PhD and the place of the doctorate in your life
demands particular attention, we believe, because it is often one of the taboo sub-
jects that gets overlooked and missed off the institutional agenda. We have dedi-
cated four chapters to uncovering the complexities of relationships of support and
the obligations of institutions to support students, and we also make suggestions
as to where and how this support can be accessed.
To begin, Chapter 15 returns to the relationship PhD students have with their
supervisor. To be read in conjunction with Chapter 3 ‘Choosing and Changing Your
Supervisor’, Chapter 15 irons out exactly what you should expect from your super-
visor, your own obligations to work with the relationship and how to use your
supervisions effectively. Exploring different types and styles of supervision will give
students insight into the nuances of the relationship, including a benchmark from
which to measure their supervisory arrangements. Using examples from our con-
tributors, we explore troubleshooting tips and how to manage the somewhat
complex relationship with your supervisor.
Chapter 16 takes a more objective view of the wider research environment that
PhD students work within. Here we examine the problems with the academic insti-
tution that can be disabling for some students, reducing opportunities for a fair
and discrimination-free experience. We particularly look at the issues around insti-
tution practices, equal opportunities and how to find out your rights as a student.
Looking specifically at ways in which students can be exploited in the academic
institution, we highlight methods of making sure you are given the resources, time
and expertise that is part of the university’s contract with you.
Chapter 17 draws on some of the issues highlighted in the previous chapter by
examining the increasing tendency for postgraduate students to be heavily
involved in caring commitments and the obligations that come with managing and
running a household. Drawing heavily on examples from men and women who
have been PhD students whilst also caring for members of their immediate and
extended families, the concerns of managing multiple responsibilities are addressed
through a realistic perspective. We examine how doing a PhD can often be incom-
patible with other life commitments and roles, and how, although perhaps these
problems cannot be resolved, working solutions can be found. These challenges,
burdens and commitments are explored in the context of managing the academic
workload and the three-year deadline.
The chapter that closes the book examines how students who take on the PhD
can experience stress due to a combination of work and personal issues. Stress is
examined as an occupational hazard of this job, and we hope the chapter offers
comfort to those who doubt their abilities or feel that the problems are insur-
mountable. We identify several avenues of support, including specialist counselling
services, that are available free of charge through most universities.
Relationships of Support
174
Chapter 15
What to Expect from Your
Supervisor
What this Chapter Includes:

Outline of what your supervisor should be doing

What to expect in terms of support and feedback

Your work expectations

Your responsibility in the relationship

How to use your supervisions effectively

Managing your supervisor]
The basics
Chapter 3 explains the processes of choosing and changing your supervisor.This chap-
ter looks at the relationship more deeply and explores what the student should expect
from their supervisor, the types of supervisory relationships and some troubleshooting
tips for getting the best out of the supervisory arrangements.When you enter a rela-
tionship with a supervisor,it is natural to feel fairly unclear about the nature of the rela-
tionship because it is not something that is mirrored in other types of relationships, say
for example that of a boss and employee. Although there are some similarities, the
nature of a PhD does not carry the same hierarchical relationship and often the expec-
tations and parameters are blurred.As one contributor admitted:
When I began to work with my supervisor I had no idea what I could or could not
expect of him. He was a very busy head of department and I did not want to make
too many calls on his time, but on the other hand I felt very raw and rather over-
whelmed with the size and length of the research undertaking. I was not sure I had
actually ever done any research before, and I certainly had no idea how I was
going to work on a project which would be so lengthy in terms of words and years.
[Gina Wisker]
Immediately in the relationship there is tension, expectation, dependency and
concern about the huge task ahead. Because of the unfamiliarity of the relationship,
it needs to be approached head on and managed constructively from the outset.Your
supervisor may well set out clear expectations from the beginning, but if this does
not happen then there are some requests you can make and certain actions to take
to make sure that you are using the relationship to its fullest capacity.
Types of supervision
It is important to recognise right from the beginning that there are established tem-
plates for supervisory arrangements, different forms of supervision and also different
styles of supervision.Although ‘style’, like fashion, is a personal thing, there is some-
thing useful to be said about the generic methods of supervision that you may find
yourself involved with. First, we will start by acknowledging how supervisors are
monitored and checked to demonstrate that there has been increasing emphasis on
universities providing good quality and effective supervision.
A safe pair of hands?
The supervisory relationship has been one area that has been dragged into the lime-
light and bureaucratised in recent years.The Metcalfe Report (2002) examined many
aspects of postgraduate experience and reported back to the Higher Education fund-
ing councils with the objective of improving standards in postgraduate research pro-
grammes.This report introduced a framework of standards and a code of practice for
universities to follow in order to protect students and provide effective supervisory
arrangements.As a result, supervisory arrangements are now much more institution-
alised and go through checks and monitoring processes to ensure quality. Each insti-
tution will have its own guidelines about who qualifies to be nominated a supervisor,
and the amount and type of supervision that PhD students should receive. For
instance, at the University of Leeds the guidelines are for students to receive ten ses-
sions each year. Funders will also want to know who the supervisors are, what expe-
rience they have and what the arrangements are for supervisory meetings. Those
who have not supervised before will often be mentored by experienced supervisors
such as the postgraduate tutor. In addition, there is plenty of guidance and training
for supervisors. Departments and universities are also monitored by external quality
review processes that examine what is happening at different levels.
The standard code of practice introduced as a recommendation from the Metcalfe
Report states that there should be the following:
•
A formal agreement between the student and the university.
•
Teaching of a series of generic skills.
•
A student-held log which records research supervisions.
•
Agreed action plans and courses.
Relationships of Support
176
Supervisory arrangements are taken seriously by institutions and ‘best practice’ is
expected at all levels. Good supervision can happen in many different forms. Below
we look at the three standard types: single, joint and team supervision.
Single supervision
Traditionally, PhDs were supervised by one academic who was considered to be the
expert in the subject. This traditional method of just one academic bearing the
responsibility for all aspects of the supervision has faded with recent improvements
and standards. Perhaps due to the isolated nature of a one-to-one supervisory sys-
tem, most institutions now offer joint supervision. Nevertheless, whatever form of
supervision you are offered, there are some basic requirements of all supervisors.
Hockey (1994: 186) summarises that supervisors should:
•
Be effective in their organisation and planning with students.
•
Communicate with clarity.
•
Be flexible and sensitive to student needs.
•
Set clear expectations.
•
Provide professional guidance.
Joint supervision
The Metcalfe Report recommended that institutions take on a joint supervisory style
as part of the framework for standards.They recommended that students have two
supervisors to ensure ‘increased visibility of the relationship which will give added
protection to students’ (2002: 22). The sensitive nature of the student–supervisor
relationship means that having two supervisors should prevent any major issues aris-
ing, and ensure that at least one supervisor is available all year round.Within this
dyad, one academic normally takes the lead as the ‘main’ supervisor. This is often
divided based on expertise. Having two people, often with different specialisms and
experience, can be refreshing as you benefit from the strengths of each supervisor. For
instance, one may be able to advise more on the academic content of the research,
while the other could be more tuned to the process of getting the PhD done. Or one
may be more methodologically skilled whilst the other is more of an expert in your
topic area.
BOX 15.1
Keep records of all your supervisory meetings and important emails from your depart-
ment and supervisor, and all correspondence with funders. Learn good record keeping.
What to Expect from your Supervisor
177
Team supervision
You may find yourself doing a PhD as part of a larger research team. In this sense
you may have one person who takes the lead role, but have supervision with differ-
ent seniors at different times and for different things! For instance, you could see one
person about methodology, another about the management of the actual project and
another about academic and intellectual issues. Somewhere in this complex set of
relationships you will have to find a way of getting emotional support through what
we have been describing as a ‘journey’. One of the contributors, Ruth Bartlett, was
on a case studentship and part of a larger team working on dementia research:
A strategy I used to manage what I recognised to be a shift in my working identity
was to seek emotional support from an academic supervisor. Because my
PhD was a case studentship on a specialist topic I had three supervisors, one of
whom was a clinical psychologist. In the early stages of the study I used my
sessions with this supervisor to discuss dilemmas I was having, especially about
feeling quite powerless.
Even if you are not in a team supervisory situation, you may still choose to use
your supervisory arrangements to receive certain types of support and then other
mentoring or peer relationships for emotional feedback.
Styles of supervision
The theorising around ‘how to be a good supervisor’ has started to take off, with
books such as Supervising the PhD: A Guide to Success (Delamont et al., 1998) acting
as bibles for the new, inexperienced and novice supervisor.To summarise issues of
supervisor styles, there seems to be two defaults that are in operation when supervi-
sors set out on the rocky path of nurturing students through the doctorate process.
These defaults stem from the supervisors’own experiences.Like parents learn to par-
ent from their parents, supervisors often learn to supervise from their own supervi-
sors.Or not,as the case may be.The point is that reflexivity is often an inbuilt process
when supervisors develop their own system and methods of communication.These
two defaults manifest as follows.
Supervise as supervised
Those supervisors who had a ‘good’ experience will tend to mirror the supervision
they had.For instance,the boundaries or informality surrounding the relationship are
Relationships of Support
178
usually learned from being supervised; likewise, how to develop effective relation-
ships and create an efficient and safe learning environment are all implicitly learned
from ‘good’supervision.Often those supervisors who have had good supervision will
be clear about the different aspects of the supervisory role and try to ‘perform’ on all
of these.
Supervise as was not supervised
Let’s at once dispel the myth that only those who have gone on to work in acade-
mia are the products of fine supervision.There will be as many cases of poor super-
vision as good supervision that academics will have gone through and will use to
inform their own roles.This pretty much follows the line, whereby you make a vow
that you will not let the same mistakes happen again and set out to ‘do things differ-
ently’.The learning curve could be more about the interpersonal skills and respect
that should be paramount in an effective relationship. No doubt if your supervisor is
one who went through hell and back you will find out exactly what the story is.
The ebb and flow of the journey
Your supervisory arrangements will most probably change with the flow of the PhD
process. For instance, you are more likely to see your supervisor(s) more frequently
in the first year when you are working hard to figure out the research questions,
design a feasible project and pass through the upgrade process after the first year.The
upgrade process involves preparing a set of documents that are presented to a panel,
then, in a viva style interview, you will be asked questions about the project to see if
it will meet the criteria needed for a PhD and that you can also do what you are
proposing.During this process you will probably see your supervisors more to ensure
the upgrade is successful. The year that is designated to fieldwork is often a time
when the student is away from the university ‘in the field’;this could mean immersed
in a situation that is local, or could indeed mean international research. Either way,
this year perhaps receives a little less attention from the supervisor as it is trusted that
you are clearer on the objectives of the research.The final year of analysis and writ-
ing up re-focuses the student–supervisor relationship as the task in hand is to write
something useful, critical and analytical. The to-ing and fro-ing of chapter-
by-chapter intensifies the relationship, especially in the closing stages of edits and
re-writes. At this time you would expect to have more frequent contact with your
supervisor.
Overall expectations
We have established that there are different forms of supervision and academics will
adopt their own style. But there are some consistent good practices to look out for,
What to Expect from your Supervisor
179
and also to act upon if this is not what you are experiencing. It is important to get
the outline, objective and purpose of the supervisory meetings clear from the begin-
ning. Gina Wisker recounts how she set up her initial sessions with her supervisor.
Doing the PhD part-time and living away from the university meant that there were
other issues to contend with as well as working out what the supervisions were for:
I was a part-time student teaching full-time, living away from the university (120
miles) and commuting to work in another town. We decided after our initial conver-
sations that the best way to proceed would be if he made some suggestions about
work to do, I would then read, research, write, extend what he had suggested or
cut back as it developed, and as I started to write (he was adamant I should do
this immediately so he could learn to work on my writing) to send him some writ-
ing in whatever state it was in. I learned to write drafts and phone him up or write
and agree a date to send them and to come up and see him.
Gina’s account of basing the supervisory meetings around a set piece of work fol-
lows a fairly standard pattern.The ‘hook’ for the meetings is usually written work,
but towards the fieldwork stage there can be other tasks such as interview schedules,
consent forms, transcripts, sampling frames, coding etc. The thought of having to
produce written work from day 1 can seem daunting when you are very much at
the beginning of the process.You may feel unconfident about your writing capabil-
ities (this is normal), or not really know what is meant by ‘writing a chapter’,‘doing
a mapping exercise’ or ‘literature review’ (see Chapter 6). But, as Claire Maxwell out-
lines, positive feedback can be gained from this process, which can help you develop
essential skills:
Getting confirmation from my supervisor that my written work was at a high enough
standard to pass for a PhD was crucial in increasing my confidence that I was oper-
ating at the right level – something I had really struggled with and doubted.
Setting out work expectations, communication expectations and general ground
rules for engagement is a must early on in the working relationship (see Chapter 3).
Delamont et al. (1998: 23) set out guidelines for a good relationship with a supervi-
sor highlighting some basic issues, such as choose a ‘best time of day’ to have meet-
ings,always set an agenda,review the meetings at the annual cycle and respect mutual
availability.
Relationships of Support
180
Overall,you can expect a range of direct feedback,intellectual discussion,motivation
and support from your supervisor.Phillips and Pugh (2005:147) summarise what students
should expect:
•
Written work to be read in advance.
•
Constructive criticism.
•
Good knowledge of the research area.
•
An exchange of ideas.
•
Supervisor to act as a role model.
•
Supervisor to teach the skill of research.
•
Short-term goal setting that feeds into longer-term objectives.
•
Healthy and helpful ‘psychological contract’.
BOX 15.2
Be prepared for a range of criticism: good and bad feedback is the only way to learn and
see your work improve.
We would add some additional roles that you can expect from the supervisor:
•
Guidance through the fieldwork stage.
•
Facilitating access as much as possible.
•
Practical advice on ‘how to’.
•
Giving judgement.
•
Advice on careers and steps towards careers.
•
Facilitating networking.
•
Confidence building.
•
Interest in personal development.
•
Aware of isolation.
•
Enforcing rules and regulations.
•
Ensuring you are meeting the deadlines and milestones.
These bullet points are all well and good sitting on this page, but in the real world it
must be remembered that academics have their own self-interests when they take on
postgraduates. For the supervisor, taking on students can initially be a burden: it isn’t
clear if the student will work hard and progress at the necessary rate or leave half-way
through because the task was too onerous. Be aware that supervisors have their own
agenda. Having doctorate students looks good on their CV, provides an opportunity to
coach a new researcher and provides a supply of teaching support or research assistants.
What to Expect from your Supervisor
181
In addition, academics are most keen to invest time in students who are interested in
similar ideas, willing to take the topic further and be at the cutting edge. Remember,
academics do not become supervisors out of the goodness of their heart.Yet remember
that students have more to lose than their supervisor if they don’t succeed. Box 15.3
provides an example of how one university perceives the supervisor’s responsibilites.
BOX 15.3
A research student supervisor’s responsibilities include:
•
The supervisor will give guidance on research topic, methods, techniques, approach,
planning, literature and progress.
•
The supervisor should arrange training on subject-specific and generic skills, as well
as actively introducing the student to other workers in the field, encouraging partici-
pation in conferences/forums/academic societies.
•
The supervisor should possess sufficient knowledge of the research area to provide
accurate advice and guidance on the project.
•
The supervisor must ensure that regular supervisory sessions take place, uninter-
rupted as far as possible by other business. Both student and supervisor should have
a clear, agreed understanding of the frequency and nature of contact required.
•
The supervisor should have sufficient available time to dedicate to supervision.
•
The student and supervisor must have an agreed procedure for dealing with urgent
problems and conflicts. The student and supervisor are encouraged to produce a
learning agreement.
•
The supervisor should read and provide constructive criticism for all the written work
submitted and advise on publications.
(source: http://www.city.ac.uk/researchstudies/rdcforms.htm)
Managing your supervision
The relationship is a two-way street.You will only get out of the relationship what
you put in and this means that you need to recognise your own responsibilities in
fulfilling your end of the bargain.
Your responsibility is:
•
To keep in contact with your supervisor – they will not chase you.
•
Supervisors are busy so you need to be at the front of the queue. Always set and keep
meetings.
•
Be flexible with your times – your supervisor is busier than you are.
•
Be honest when negotiating workload – if your supervisor’s requests are too much then
speak up.
•
Once the supervisions are over, if you are not clear, make contact to clarify.
•
Make sure you do the work set otherwise inform your supervisor beforehand.
•
Do not sit in the dark for several weeks – pick up the phone, send an email, visit
during the open door times.
Relationships of Support
182
Time is a major factor in all aspects of doing a PhD and time is also an important
feature in your relationship with your supervisor. Making sure you see each other at
the appropriate time, that each session allows for enough concentrated time (i.e.
answering the phone or door is avoided), and that meetings are spaced so adequate
time is given in between meetings. Gina Wisker notes how time was a pressure, and
she was mindful of the lack of time of her supervisor:
He and I were both gradually aware of how to enable me to handle the time pres-
sures of research and writing and to manage the different time pressures of
my workloads, while I learned not to make enormous or any sudden and unrea-
sonable demands on his time because he was also pressurised, but we did have
quality time every time we met and discussed serious issues, and the written
work.
Therefore, using both your time and your supervisor’s time wisely is essential.
Here are some tips on how to use supervisions effectively.
BOX 15.4
Using a supervision session effectively 
Before you go to supervisions:
•
Constructively plan what you want to accomplish by the end.
•
Prioritise your issues.
•
Do not use the session just to moan.
•
Set out specific questions or an agenda to frame the meeting (these can be emailed
before the meeting).
•
Make sure no one gets sidetracked and that you get answers.
After supervision sessions:
•
If you have missed out questions then email afterwards.
•
If there is something you are unclear about then follow up.
•
If you have not arranged a date for the next session then suggest one.
•
Make sure you are clear about what you need to do before the next session.
Taking ownership of the process
It has already been noted in Chapter 3 that there can be problems in the supervisor
relationship:‘The supervisory relationship can be a very private one. In the majority
of cases this is an extremely constructive and fruitful partnership, but there are times
What to Expect from your Supervisor
183
when relationships break down with consequences for the student, the supervisor
and the research’ (Metcalfe Report, 2002: 22). Gina Wisker warns that there are sev-
eral potential misunderstandings about the level of the work, ways of working
together,culture clashes and learning styles clashes.This can often manifest when you
and your supervisor have different ideas about the direction that your work should
take. For instance, it is common for supervisors to have strong feelings about using
certain methodological traditions which may not be quite what you had in mind.
Or it may be that your supervisor wants you to concentrate on a particular variable
and your interests are in other directions. In this instance, the clash is not futile, ter-
minal or insurmountable but just a taster of the academic world where people dis-
agree and have different opinions.The solution does not have to be you giving in to
your supervisor’s wishes but instead taking ownership of the situation, rationally con-
sidering the alternative options and presenting a case as to why your idea should over-
ride that of the supervisor. The key thing to remember is that if you have a
methodological, pragmatic or theoretical justification for going ahead as you see fit,
then this argument should hold weight with your supervisor and in a viva further
down the line when you need to explain your actions. At the end of the day it is
your PhD, and taking ownership, stating your case and putting your ideas forward
can be a liberating experience.
Key Points to Remember

It is a two-way relationship, which means you also have responsibilities.

Learn to approach supervisions professionally.

Plan an agenda for each supervision.

Keep a record of your communication with your supervisor.

You will have limited time from your supervisor, so use it wisely.

Time will be the most important asset.

There are many sources of advice if you think your supervisions are not work-
ing. Seek out the postgraduate tutor.
SUGGESTED READING
Eley, A.R. and Jennings, R. (2005) Effective Postgraduate Supervision.
Improving the Student/Supervisor Relationship. Maidenhead: Open
University Press.
Phillips, E. and Pugh, D. (2005) How to Get a PhD, 4th edn. Maidenhead:
Open University Press.
Wisker, G. (2005) The Good Supervisor. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Relationships of Support
184
Chapter 16
Enabling Research Environments
What this Chapter Includes:
 Challenging exploitation and enabling student development
 Research students and institutional responsibilities
 Equal opportunities in the PhD context
 Student experiences and institutional practices
 Supervision and additional part-time academic work
 Enabling access to facilities, resources and equal opportunity
 Knowing your rights as a research student
Challenging exploitation and enabling student
development
This chapter considers universities as institutions with responsibilities to provide a
safe,supportive and enabling learning and research environment.We also acknowledge
the persistence of some exploitative and discriminatory practices within doctoral stu-
dent experiences (see below Graves and Varma, 1997; Hockey, 1994; Phillips and
Pugh, 2005).There has been a concerted effort within universities to improve stan-
dards across institutions and realise equality of opportunity for access to Higher
Education.The Dearing Report (1997) provided a major impetus for revising the
standards of the PhD research programme, and particularly the supervisor–student
relationship. The Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE) sup-
ported a revision of standards of the Code of Practice in academic quality set out by
the Quality Assurance Agency (2004). For doctoral students, this meant the academic
appeals process and student complaints procedure was strengthened and the general
monitoring and support for PhD students was standardised.We hope to enhance stu-
dent awareness of the statutory and ethical duties of universities in order to help pro-
tect against and address unsatisfactory practices – many of which are the result of
unintentional actions and embedded cultures.As we shall see, there are aspects to the
research student–supervisor–institution relationship that can encompass grey areas.
The PhD can be viewed as an ‘academic apprenticeship’but can also involve ‘exploita-
tion’ if additional paid work opportunities leave the research student unprepared or
underpaid. Likewise, the significance of ‘autonomous study’ or ‘independent learning’
can be hampered if underpinned by elements of supervisory or institutional neglect.
These issues can be complex to judge owing to highly subjective perspectives and
are rarely appropriate topics for discussion within departmental activities. While
research students have ultimate responsibility for their research, and to actively seek
and utilise the resources and facilities within your own institution and those avail-
able to the academic community, universities also have increased responsibilities
through regulation and equal opportunities legislation formalising more aspects of
the research student–university relationship.
In this chapter we will consider common vulnerabilities research students can
experience, such as feeling unable to refuse unpaid or ill-conceived research or
teaching assistant work.Additionally, some particular students have been recognised
as needing more targeted support, such as disabled students, in order to access post-
graduate research opportunities. Raising awareness of your own and the university’s
rights and responsibilities will be important to enhance your awareness.With these
concerns in mind, the chapter begins with a brief overview of the institutional
framework of support for PhD students in the UK, with a discussion of recognised
good practice.We then turn to consider some student experiences in relation to the
supervisor–student relationship, taking on additional academic-related work during
your PhD and seeking support for particular needs such as those related to having
a disability or being a student with caring responsibilities.The final section of the
chapter reviews the varied nature of institutional and personal practices, reflecting
on some of the points raised in the first section when thinking about ways
of negotiating an enabling research environment that suits your professional and
personal development needs.
Research students and institutional
responsibilities
The framework of legal and institutional regulations and services surrounding post-
graduate research and learning has changed considerably in the past few years within
UK universities.There has been a concerted effort to enhance the quality of provi-
sion and teaching,so that universities and key personnel – such as supervisors,Boards
of Studies, postgraduate tutors, human resources, student support services and heads
of department – have a clearer and regulated role in respect to research students.
Legislation relating to equal opportunities in a more general sense and specific
changes to doctoral supervision aim to set out the rights and responsibilities of
research students, supervisors, other department personnel and other university ser-
vices, such as student support services for disabled students. The support needs of
international students, students who are parents or carers and disabled students, have
become more widely recognised as well as the need to address exploitative and
discriminatory practices and cultures.
Relationships of Support
186
Equal opportunities
If you seek out your university’s equal opportunities and anti-discrimination policies
and codes of practice (accessible via the human resources/personnel department web
page or main contacts), you will hopefully find that something similar to the follow-
ing mission and principles inform them:
This university is committed to equal opportunities in all its activities. It is intended that
all students should receive equal treatment irrespective of political belief, gender, sexual
orientation, age, disability, marital status, race, nationality, ethnic origin, religion or social
background. (City University, London, July 2006)
The drive to establish equal opportunities within Higher Education in practice,
however, continues to be a challenge as the changes required involve attitudinal, cul-
tural and institutional change.Further objectives,such as widening participation agendas,
need to be balanced against meeting institutional targets in other areas. Universities
seek to extend the diversity of their student cohort and adapt their educational prac-
tices in order to fulfil widening participation objectives. The quote from City
University below demonstrates the kind of cultural and institutional changes and
vision required. Equal Opportunities is not merely about dismantling direct and
indirect discrimination – it is about realising the contribution a diverse cohort can
make to an institution and providing equal opportunities as a principle of social
justice and rights rather than privilege:
City University believes in the principles of social justice, acknowledges that discrimination
affects people in complex ways and is committed to challenge all forms of inequality. To
this end, City University will aim to ensure that:
•
individuals are treated fairly, with dignity and respect regardless of their age, marital status,
disability, race, faith, gender, language, social/ economical background or being lesbian or
gay and any other inappropriate distinction;
•
it affords all individuals, students and employees the opportunity to fulfil their potential;
•
it promotes an inclusive and supportive environment for staff, students and visitors;
•
it recognises the varied contributions to the achievement of the University’s mission made
by individuals from diverse backgrounds and with a wide range of experiences. (City of
London, Equal Opportunities Policy 2006)
Equal opportunities policies and legislation,therefore,are in place to promote equal-
ity of opportunity within a university,to promote good working relationships between
students and staff and to address unlawful discrimination. As a research student, and
member of the university community, you have a right to equality of opportunity and
treatment in ways that contribute to your well-being and development. For your own
awareness or in the event of feeling you have a grievance to address, seek out your
institutional policies in this area. Box 16.1 provides a guide to the kind of support
and key personnel to find out about.
Enabling Research Environments
187
BOX 16.1  Equal opportunities personnel and support services within
universities
Your overall University Council/Senate will have responsibility for ensuring the university
upholds its legal obligations in relation to equal opportunities and the Vice Chancellor will
have a key role in this. The day-to-day and strategic policy making and implementation
within your institution will be the responsibility of your Human Resources Department
which is likely to have an Equality and Diversity Officer and distinct services/policies in
relation to international students and parental rights at work legislation (such as maternity
leave). Within your department, there will also be Equality and Diversity Officers and
Trade Union Representatives. There is also likely to be a Student Welfare Support
Service and advisory support available via your Student Union.
For complaints about another member of the university community, we advise you first
of all to contact a member of academic staff and confidentially discuss your grievance
with the view to resolving things quickly and informally at the earliest possible stage. For
a more formal complaint you should seek advice from the Head of Department, Human
Resources Department and Equality/Trade Union Officers. Helpful further advice is avail-
able via the National Postgraduate Committee and the National Union of Students.
Student experiences and institutional practices
Supervision and additional part-time work
While it is important to resist the ‘I blame my supervisor for all my PhD problems’
mantra and recognise the two-way responsibilities and challenges that the
supervisor–student relationship entails, research students can become prey to exploita-
tive practices, which in many cases can be quite unintentional, arising from the culture
of an organisation or assumptions about the supervision process.There is an inherent
power and authority imbalance within student–supervisor relationships as students are
far more dependent on their supervisors than the supervisors are on research students.
Research students rely heavily on their supervisors as a source of research and wider
academic advice and support. A good supervisor who is knowledgeable in your
research area, aware of their responsibilities and seeking to enhance your academic
career can not only impart very important academic and research advice, but can also
help you to access professional contacts, dissemination opportunities and even future
academic jobs.Within this relationship, however, raising concerns about your supervi-
sors’ performance or not taking forward their advice can be a tricky situation to nav-
igate.Added to this is the possibility of non-compatibility due to differences in learning
and teaching expectations and preferences.As we stated in Chapters 3 and 15, you will
need actively to manage this relationship in order to negotiate the supervisory support
conducive to your learning style and needs.
An example of the complexity of these issues is offered from our anonymous
contributor below:
Relationships of Support
188
Soon into my studentship, I started working part-time on a voluntary project, which
was set up by my supervisor. I felt it was a big opportunity and could not believe I
had been asked to do such a job! I felt lucky at getting such good experience.
However, it was not made clear to me at the beginning, the extent of the work. I
was dealing with a lot of press inquiries and the job gradually took over from my
PhD research, especially once the main project worker left and I ended up more
or less running the project.
[Anonymous]
After getting little done on her PhD in her second year, our contributor started
to raise concerns about her research progress and the overwhelming nature of the
voluntary project role. However, with her supervisor expressing confidence in her
ability to get her PhD done alongside her other role our contributor thought her
own concerns about her PhD progress were unfounded. It was only later on, after a
year or so reflecting on this stage in her PhD, that our contributor felt her concerns
were not listened to or recognised by her supervisor. Our contributor gradually felt
more and more detached and de-motivated as a research student.
Feeling indebted to your supervisor for wider academic opportunities can be com-
mon among research students. Our contributor in this case felt in hindsight she had
over-valued this wider experience, and with little progress on her PhD she decided
to take a year out from her studies and began working full-time at the university in a
teaching capacity.The final outcome was that she did not return to her PhD study
and even gave up her new employment as she became ‘exhausted’ and ill.
There is a silver lining to this cloud, however, as we met our anonymous contributor
when she had returned to start afresh on a new doctoral project at a different university,
where she felt happy with her supervision and more focused on her PhD research.
The issues this example raises are interesting. It is common for research students to
value the opportunity to take on additional academic work for their supervisor. It can
feel flattering that your supervisor values your competence to the point of offering you
such opportunities. But opportunities can turn into risks and exploitation – especially
in terms of the time,effort and resources that are required,and the degree to which the
work complements your doctoral project. We would recommend that you carefully
consider any such work and allow for frequent reviews of how such work is progressing
your research and your career.A guide for good postgraduate working opportunities is
available via the links referenced at the end of this chapter.
Enabling access to resources and opportunities
Universities can vary quite considerably in the facilities and resources offered to
doctoral students but the minimum facilities and resources should include a desk,
Enabling Research Environments
189
computer, library access and supervision. Our contributors below, who are both
disabled students, provided examples of how the support available had to be actively
sought and the additional effort this required:
When I tried to register in my first week I soon discovered that registration was
being held in a huge hall only accessible by an old stone staircase. I had to ask a
fellow new-comer to register for me! If I had known this situation in advance I could
have made alternative arrangements. Universities are getting much better at sup-
porting disabled students but that support also has to be actively sought after. In
my early days information from the university disability support services was
vague and always needed to be followed up for clarity.
[Rebecca Mallett]
Rebecca felt emotionally drained and quite isolated from her experiences of need-
ing to plan her studies and activities quite carefully to accommodate her physical impair-
ment and the barriers to opportunities that other students could take for granted:
It’s draining and laborious to be the only one thinking through how other people’s
decisions (e.g. which room to book for a seminar) might affect your ability to par-
ticipate. When doing fieldwork with an impairment you often feel uncertain, vulner-
able and quite helpless at times. I often vented frustration in my research journals
and there are many extracts in them discussing how, during fieldwork, I was
unable to make the detailed plans I normally did because I had to rely on so many
things and so many other people.
Another PhD student, Sonali Shah, felt it took her a while to find out about her
rights to support, while she was coping with feeling quite isolated owing to her
physical restrictions that meant she could only study at her computer in her bed-sit
and not the shared postgraduate study area:
On such occasions I felt very isolated. This isolation was also due to the fact that
I was working from my student bed-sit and had very little social contact with other
PhD students who worked together in a research room. One of the primary reasons
Relationships of Support
190
(Continued)
I worked alone and not in the research room was the fact I needed specialist IT
support, which was set up on my personal computer but not on any computer in
the research room. I now realise I should have not let this happen. I should have
been much firmer about my rights and the support I required – and asked for this
IT to be available elsewhere. I felt the disability advice service did not provide
much support or advice for me as a postgraduate.
Universities can offer disabled students help with specialist accommodation, soft-
ware, personal assistants and equipment – but what is offered also needs to not lead
to isolation. Finding and negotiating this additional support takes time and effort:
The effects of my physical impairment prevented me from completing and submit-
ting my PhD within three years, which fitted the university and funding timetable.
Doctoral research took me longer as I also had to rely on personal assistants, who
are not experienced researchers, to locate relevant publications for me, time that
is not accounted for in the official time allocated to complete a PhD. Furthermore,
the turnover of personal assistants during my studies was high. Therefore signifi-
cant time was taken up advertising for and training new personal assistants to
assist me. Having to rely on personal assistants also influenced my fieldwork in
terms of when I could conduct the interviews.
[Sonali Shah]
In this instance, Sonali was able to gain a further year as her supervisor approached
her funder directly and effectively negotiated an extension. Rebecca felt more positive
about the institutional support for disabled students:
I am fortunate to be funded by a research council, have access to a ‘non-medical
helper’ fund through DSA (Disabled Student’s Allowance) and have a brilliant dis-
ability adviser. She acts as a liaison between me and my department and the
research council. Through DSA I employ support workers to help me access
places that are inaccessible, such as the library building.
Enabling Research Environments
191
Again, the emphasis may be on you to be informed of your rights to support.
Additional support can also be available in terms of academic language support for
students’ for whom English is a second language and for students with children.
Knowing your rights as a research student
It is possible, therefore, to set out some guiding principles and a vision of student
rights.A major problem for research students can be the isolating effects of working
on an independent piece of work that takes several years to complete – increasing
your dependence on your supervisory support.However,you should not suffer alone
if you feel your institution is not providing the support and guidance you require.
Dealing with any problem as quickly and as early as possible will help things not to
escalate and threaten your progress. Primarily, thinking through the nature of your
problem and concerns, getting them formulated in your own thoughts and raising
them with your supervisor or an alternative trusted staff member in an informal
capacity are important first steps. Secondly, finding out about your institution’s poli-
cies, codes of practice and complaints procedures will empower you to act and follow
the more formal routes of redress if necessary.
In principle, the National Union of Students proposes that students have the right
to the following ten conditions – and that these conditions also enable equality of
opportunity within Higher Education. In particular, we would like to highlight the
rights listed under numbers 3 to 10 as crucial to enabling opportunity for a diverse
research student cohort.
BOX 16.2
The NUS student bill of rights
The NUS believes every student has:
1
The right of access to post-16 education and a fair financial system of support
2
The right to representation
3
The right to study free from discrimination, prejudice and fear
4
The right to adequate support facilities and learning resources
5
The right to clear and accessible complaints and appeals procedures
6
The right to safe, secure and affordable accommodation
7
The right to a fair and equitable wage for safe part-time work
8
The right to suitable childcare provision
9
The right to be involved in Student Union activities
10
The right to be a citizen of an academic and wider community
Overall, a central message of this book is to propose a proactive and informed student
approach.Therefore,you also have the right to find out and get to know exactly what
Relationships of Support
192
is expected of you when you embark on your doctorate–academically and financially;
and to negotiate an enabling learning environment that provides a balance between
your own responsibilities for your studies and those of the university.
Key Points to Remember

Universities are regulated by equal opportunities and quality assurance legal-
isation aimed at addressing discrimination, enhancing teaching and student
support.

Get to know the key personnel within your university, department and acade-
mic community who have a role in supporting doctoral students.

Think about your rights as a student to an enabling learning environment and
opportunities – do not suffer in silence if you are concerned about the stan-
dard of supervision or support you are receiving.

Research students can be particularly vulnerable to poor supervision, informal
or low-paid part-time working conditions and isolation.

There is additional support provision for disabled students, international students
and students with children, but this support will probably have to be actively
accessed by the student.

Find out about organisations that support student welfare – such as the
National Postgraduate Committee (www.npc.org.uk).
SUGGESTED READING AND RESOURCES
Graves, N. and Varma, V. (1997) Working for a Doctorate. London: Routledge.
Hockey, J. (1994) ‘New territories: problems of adjusting to the first year of a
social science PhD’, Studies in Higher Education, 19, (2): 177–190.
National Postgraduate Committee (1992) Guidelines on Codes of Practice
for Postgraduate Research. Available at www.npc.org.uk/thenpc/
npcpublications
National Postgraduate Committee (2005) Guidelines on the Provision of
Exclusive Postgraduate Facilities. Available at
www.npc.org.uk/thenpc/npcpublications
Phillips, E.M. and Pugh, D.S. (2005) How to Get a PhD. Maidenhead: Open
University. Ch. 9 and 12.
Enabling Research Environments
193
Chapter 17
Combining Family Commitments
and Doctoral Studies
What this Chapter Includes:

Balancing multiple roles, identities and responsibilities

Incompatible and competing roles and identities

Personal and academic belonging

Complementary and empowering connections

Postgraduate students with children

Strategies for success
Balancing multiple roles and responsibilities
Over the course of this book we have illustrated how undertaking a doctorate is a huge
commitment that is rarely taken lightly.It is an endeavour that will take at least three years
to complete.Over that time,you will be undertaking an academic and a personal journey
of change and development.In this chapter we look at the experiences of,and issues raised
by, students undertaking a doctorate while also having family responsibilities.The discus-
sion also has a wider application if we consider the inter-connections between our per-
sonal lives and academic lives. Our lives and aspirations rarely fit into neat and distinct
categories as students, employees and so on. Rather, students negotiate expectations and
activities relevant to being a research student alongside expectations and aspirations for their
own well-being and as partners, family, employees and community members (also see
Chapters 11–14 in Part III of this book for consideration of combining employment with
doctoral studies, the ‘personal’ nature of the doctoral journey and non-traditional routes
into the PhD;also see Chapters 16 and 18 on aspects of personal well-being and welfare).
In this chapter we cover four key aspects of combining family responsibilities and
doctoral studies – competing roles and responsibilities, complementary connections,
institutional support and developing your own strategies for success. Within these
areas we cover issues such as seeking childcare,accommodation,financial support and
other resources and services as well as experiences of and strategies for overcoming,
the sometimes conflicting nature of academic and family roles along with recogni-
tion of complimentary connections.
Incompatible identities, roles and responsibilities?
Juggling multiple responsibilities and demands
Combining raising children with doctoral studies can feel like an impossible juggle
between multiple expectations and demands (including those we place on ourselves
and those imposed on us by others). Much will depend on the extent of your car-
ing responsibilities, the size of your family, the age of your children, health needs,
income levels and partner/social network support. It is common for student surveys
to report some degree of incompatibility while juggling family responsibilities
and doctoral studies (Edwards, 1993).You may feel anxious about or actually over-
stretched by the demands on you and unsure if family, fellow employees and friends
understand the significance that your doctoral research holds for you and the com-
mitment it entails. Partners, friends or dependants may at times also express con-
cerns about feeling ‘second place’ to your PhD! 
A complex set of personal, cultural, financial and institutional factors shape parental
experiences and much can be done in our view to help students cope and reduce such
conflicts. Our contributors indicated concern about the impact of doctoral study on
family life as well as that of family life on doctoral study.While undertaking doctoral
research is rarely a straightforward decision for any student, students with family
responsibilities often have to weigh up the costs and benefits for their family as a whole,
especially if the family income may be reduced, or whether everyone will be willing
to uproot to live nearer the host university. David felt undertaking a PhD could be a
‘risk’ for his family. David began doctoral study after several years in full-time language
teaching employment.Taking up a PhD studentship meant a considerable reduction in
the family income and change in the family ‘lifestyle’:
When considering doing a PhD after a career I had to weigh up the pros and cons of
leaving work to become a student again and was faced with a number of difficult
questions. You can be filled with apprehension and self-doubt: ‘I haven’t written or
read anything academic for years!’‘Am I too old to be a student?’‘Surely everyone on
the course will be used to studying and I’ll be the “odd one out”?’ ‘What will my col-
leagues, friends, and family think if I leave a job to become a student again?’ Take
financial matters – unless you are in the enviable position of knowing now that you
are realistically able to finance three or four years of PhD study – there are a number
of difficult financial matters to consider (this is all the more so given the fact that, as
a mature student, it is probably more likely that you will be faced throughout your stud-
ies with having to meet ongoing financial commitments which younger, ‘pre-career’
students are less likely to be faced with, such as a mortgage, bills, and children).This
will call for meticulous (and, if you have a family, collective) financial planning.
[David Smith]
Family Commitments and Doctoral Studies
195
Edwards (1993) refers to the anxieties mothers can feel in undertaking projects
that indicate self-aspiration rather than service and care for other family members.
David above indicated the ‘risky’ decision for many in taking a reduced salary in
order to follow a doctoral programme.While we hope undertaking a PhD will be
beneficial for your family as a whole, and an endeavour supported by your family
and friends,this may not always be the case.Strain can appear,such as when you need
concentrated time alone to study, think and write, or when you are struggling with
a period of uncertainty about the direction or conclusions of your research.These
times can be very all-consuming and individual in nature.
When contemplating PhD study later in life, the compatibility of PhD study with ‘life
as you knew it’ before is an issue. I found there was a massive shift from a lifestyle
that revolves around a career and ‘regular’ family living patterns to the lifestyle of
a PhD student. The scale of these changes should not be under-estimated, and
anyone contemplating a PhD will have to consider the extent to which family and
friends will be supportive of the new direction your life has taken, as well as the
extent to which you will be able to shape your family life around the needs of PhD
study. PhD ‘working habits’ can be highly irregular, and often come in short bursts
of hectic activity in which you find yourself deeply engaged in late-night reading
and writing sessions, followed by moments of relative calm, where deadlines have
been met, write-ups completed, conferences attended, interviews completed, etc.
Further, PhD study often leaves you with a sense of isolation as well as a need for
individual study, of being locked away from the world with ‘your’ project which
nobody else understands or is particularly interested in.
[David Smith] 
In a survey posted on a UK university postgraduate forum,one mature student vividly
paints a picture of juggling competing demands, with a ‘resolution’ involving working at
home as much as possible, which was also problematic as this led to isolation:
Like any working mother I am constantly juggling. At first I struggled to come to meetings
and courses that clashed at every point with child care and parent care and part-time
work commitments and social life. The latter is not a luxury but an absolute necessity if
you are working largely on your own. Early evening courses might fit in with part-time
studying but not if you have children as well. I attempted to make contact with other stu-
dents. I failed. I managed to continue by basing myself at home and working from there
as I used to do as a freelancer. I came in for supervision and for necessary meetings.
(Liesbeth de Block, Learning Matters 
k1.ioe.ac.uk/learningmatters/studforum.htm)
Negotiating time and space for your doctoral research within your family routine and
environment can be challenging, and may require much flexibility, negotiation and
Relationships of Support
196
explaining on everyone’s part.It is fairly unrealistic to think you can leave your thoughts
on your PhD at the door on coming home, or that you can leave your personal family
issues at home when you go to university.Thinking about how your PhD and family
life will impact on each other will be helpful for you to identify such strains and talk-
ing through mutual expectations and demands is recommended by some students:
You will need to ask yourself how PhD demands might affect family commitments.
Will you be able to integrate these rather unstable demands into family life, and will
family members be able to accommodate the sudden changes and new element of
unpredictability which doing a PhD entails? Will you be able to negotiate a ‘space’
for your studies – a place exclusively for your desk, books, papers, computer and
notes, where you are guaranteed time to maintain the intense degree of concentra-
tion which your studies will demand? Will you face severe restrictions in your study
times and working habits (students with fewer family/home commitments, for exam-
ple, may like to work late at night rather than throughout the day – an option which
is not open to everyone).
[David Smith]
Dislocation and difference: bridging family and academic
belonging 
Although there are more undergraduate and postgraduate students with children today
compared to ten or twenty years ago,there can still be a popular image of the traditional
student being one who is younger and without caring responsibilities. Additionally,
many supervisors can expect long hours of studying as evidence of doctoral commit-
ment – and studying for a doctorate will necessitate much individual study in practice.
Whether a fiction of our insecurities or a dominant cultural imaginary – research stu-
dents with children can feel different compared to images of the mainstream student.
Anxieties around ‘fitting in’ can be particularly overwhelming and can be real barriers
to participating in group social activities or academic seminars/conferences,especially if
these are within out-of-school hours. Mature students can feel less familiar with con-
vertions of oral or written academic communication but becoming conversant in aca-
demic disciplinary discourse is a must for success (Wisker, 2001).
On the other hand, research into the experiences of non-traditional students, espe-
cially those who are parents, older or from more minority ethnic or working class
backgrounds, has noted how research students find that their research interests and
work become incomprehensible to their families (Morley, 1999). However, this situa-
tion can lessen over time as families and friends themselves become more conversant
with your academic role, and personal well-being can be enhanced by actively seeking
and building support networks with other mature students with family responsibilities.
Family Commitments and Doctoral Studies
197
It is also worth thinking through your preconceptions. Harriet Churchill felt that
she had ‘internalised a position of disadvantage and anxiety’ in the early stages of
embarking on doctoral research. She was surprised to meet other doctoral students
with family responsibilities:
I was concerned about how I was going to balance looking after my pre-school
child with doing my studies. Having looked after my daughter full-time for two years
I was unsure how she would take to full-time nursery. I was also worried about
whether I would be able to join in on out-of-nursery-hours events and seminars.
However, to my surprise another first year research student had a young child,
which challenged my preconceptions of being so different.
Research students with family responsibilities can also experience very real con-
straints in accessing and completing doctoral research. Our contributors and our
research have particularly noted time,finances,accommodation and childcare constraints
as key issues. Students with family commitments report feeling time-stretched, with a
daily trade-off between attending a networking event,meeting fellow students for lunch
or getting your head down to study when you only have school hours and evenings for
research! This adds to the strain of wondering whether you are ‘doing enough’ and
‘being productive’. Immersion in study sometimes has to be organised around the rou-
tines set for children, sometimes leading to studying late into the night or before the
children rise the next day.At times students who are parents feel excluded from evening
seminar or social events.However,Harriet felt that whilst being a mother with a young
child did restrict her autonomy as a doctoral student it also provided a clear boundary
between her doctoral activities and the rest of her life:
I felt very ‘time pressured’ – constantly aware of time – time I had spent studying,
time I had taken out. Once my daughter was attending school (the nursery hours
fitted better with full-time working hours) my day at university was structured by the
school day, which ends at 3pm. My studying day at the university felt shorter than
many of my fellow PhD students. I attempted to ‘catch up’ with my studies by study-
ing until late into the night after children’s bedtime! In hindsight I am not sure how
productive this strategy was as then I was tired the following days. However, mother-
hood was also my area of research so my experiences were a rich source of crit-
ical inquiry for me. Further, being a mother and having a caring role for a young
child was also an alternative set of commitments and very consuming, so that
I was able to switch off from my studies.
Relationships of Support
198
Complementary and empowering
connections
Harriet makes a significant point about the empowering and complementary
nature of combining family responsibilities with doctoral research, which we
would also like to recognise and encourage students to think about.Above, Harriet
describes her appreciation of having clear ‘boundaries’ in some senses – such as
those relating to a daily structure between ‘family time and PhD time’, so that fam-
ily responsibilities offered an alternative role and time out from thinking about and
doing doctoral-related work. Alternative viewpoints have moved beyond a purely
‘constraint or limitation’ perception of family responsibilities in relation to doc-
toral research. Not only do parents bring valuable skills and attributes to their stud-
ies and university activities, such as organisational, communication and adaptability
skills, they also bring a wealth of life experience. Further, their children are likely
to become aware of Higher Education possibilities and activities. If you are con-
cerned about your competence or training needs as a research student, having
returned to formal education after many years of absence, do not suffer with these
anxieties alone – universities now run many training courses or can help with
funding and academic development in a broader sense beyond your specific
research training needs. Uncertainty, anxieties and self-doubt if recognised and not
pathologised could be thought through in a process of self-reflexivity and identi-
fication of what is needed to enhance the doctoral process and offer important
learning opportunities for you. This might include seeking additional support,
identifying training needs or acquiring a mentor. Indeed, it is in recognition of the
need to support PhD students in a more regulated way that many universities now
offer annual training needs audits with each student, in line with quality assurance
recommendations.
Institutional support for postgraduate students
with children
Within your institution, there may be access to provision and support for childcare,
your own and your child’s welfare, accommodation, flexible access to research stu-
dent facilities and resources, financial support and informal peer support.There are
also a number of government departments and advice organisations that can offer
help with visas, additional financial support and childcare advice for students.
The National Union of Students has also published guidelines for good practice (see
below), which can provide a checklist against which to find out about provision and
support within your university or indeed can be a yardstick to campaign for better
provision.
Access to affordable and accessible childcare is crucial in enabling many people to
undertake doctoral research. For Harriet Churchill the institutional policy and pro-
vision for childcare was favourable:
Family Commitments and Doctoral Studies
199
Particular good aspects of the university nursery provision were income-related
fees, a free settling in period before my studies commenced and the on-campus
location. For me as a PhD student the fees were at the lowest rate, which all stu-
dents paid, which was about half the average local rate for full-time nursery child-
care at that time.There was an on-site nursery only a few minutes’ walk away from
the departmental offices. With the ability to relocate a couple of months before the
beginning of my PhD, there was also the advantage of the nursery policy to grad-
ually build up towards full-time attendance over a few weeks, thus potentially eas-
ing the transition for child and parent.
The National Union of Students (see nus.org.uk) campaign for four key aspects of
good practice in institutional provision of childcare for students and staff stipulates:
1
Childcare arrangements must be flexible to suit the needs of students with children
of various ages within and out of school hours and terms.
2
As a supplement to this, bursaries for child-minding should be available for students
for whom home-based childcare is appropriate.
3
The student should be given sufficient flexibility to be able to cope with emergencies
if they arise. This applies to attending meetings and seminars, amongst other areas.
4
Institutional environments must be safe for students to bring their children. If this is
not possible (e.g. in the case of laboratories) there should be an area where children
may be safely left alone for a short period of time.
Another important source of information is childlink.gov.uk, which is a national
website that advertises childcare providers on a locality basis and provides advice and
guidance for parents seeking childcare.There are some good examples and practice
guidelines on childminding contracts and list of questions to ask prospective
providers.
Advice, counselling and information
Your Students’ Union Advice and Welfare Centre, Graduate Student Support Centre
or Accommodation Office should also be able to assist you with advice on visas,
employment rights and taxation and welfare benefit issues. Another valuable service
that can be available is counselling,offered to students on a one-off basis or as a longer-
term arrangement. Counselling may help in thinking through any difficulties you
are experiencing in your academic or personal relationships and activities (see
Chapter 18).
Other key organisations will be the National Union of Students (NUS), National
Council for One Parent Families, National Institute for Family and Parenting,
Relationships of Support
200
Parentline, and the Department for Education and Skills (DfES, contact details in
Suggested Reading below). Contact your local Social Services Department if you
feel you need a Carers Assessment – by law Social Services are required to carry out
such an assessment if you are caring for a relative.They take into account your sta-
tus as a student and the needs of the carer/cared-for.They can offer respite or home
help services.
Financial support and accommodation
It is worth inquiring about family-orientated university accommodation as this can be
cheaper than alternative accommodation for families and centrally located near the
university. Research students on studentships funded by research councils or universi-
ties are also eligible for top-up Access to Learning funds, which are also available for
low income UK students who are deemed in need of extra financial support. It is
worth investigating the application procedure and eligibility via your student welfare
advice service. Students with children (especially lone parents), students with partial or
no funding and disabled students are particularly targeted. Students on low incomes
may also be eligible for Working Tax Credit and Child Tax Credit.
There are also a number of trusts and charitable organisations that seek to assist
low income or disadvantaged postgraduates, often for specific activities such as con-
ference attendance or publications. Details of these organisations are available via the
Trust/Charity Guide, which is annually updated and available within most public
and university libraries.
Strategies for success
Finding a balance between your family and research responsibilities and activities will
enhance your well-being.While your university and other organisations may be able
to help you with access to support, flexibility with deadlines if needed, and financial
assistance, students themselves are adept at generating coping strategies. Our contrib-
utors particularly valued making time and taking the effort to build up an informal
social network (see Chapter 18).Talking through problems with family, friends and
supervisors at the earliest possible stage was also advised as a good way of preventing
a larger problem in the end. Recognising you are on your own academic and per-
sonal journey may also be an important viewpoint to consider. Comparing yourself
to senior academics (who may be your age) or fellow PhD students with no caring
responsibilities beyond themselves and friends, may not be a matter of comparing
like with like.Such comparisons can lead to dents in your self-confidence.Recognise
your achievements and personal learning, indeed celebrate and reward yourself for
reaching minor and major milestones. We advocate auditing and taking action
on your organisational, research, basic literacy and technical skills – your PhD can
be a time of personal development in a variety of ways (see Chapters 14 and 18 in
particular).
Family Commitments and Doctoral Studies
201
Key Points to Remember

Students negotiate expectations and activities relevant to being a research
student alongside expectations and aspirations for their own well-being and as
partners, family, employees and community members.

Embarking on and getting through doctoral research while having family
responsibilities can involve conflict and tensions, such as multiple expecta-
tions on your time, attention and resources.

Mature students returning to postgraduate study after some years out of for-
mal education can feel concerned about their academic competences, the
impact on family life of becoming a student and fitting in with the wider acad-
emic community.

Times and locations for seminar and social activities can conflict with family
demands.

However, support is available via your university Student Welfare Service and
Students Union.

Other organisations and government agencies can also help students with
financial support, information for childcare provision and help with accommo-
dation/research costs.
SUGGESTED READING AND RESOURCES
Department for Education and Skills (2006) Childcare Grant and Other
Financial Support to Full-Time Students Who Are Parents. Available at
www.dfes.gov.uk/studentsupport/uploads/ChildcareGrant0506.pdf
Simon, L. (2005) New Beginnings: A Reference Guide for Adult Learners.
Hemel Hempstead: Prentice-Hall.
Relationships of Support
202
Chapter 18
Coping with Stress
With Eve Parsons, Practising University Counsellor
What this Chapter Includes:

An account of the stresses and anxieties that naturally occur as part of
undertaking a PhD

A review of the place of counselling in the Higher Education sector

Recognition that PhDs are taken within the context of other life issues

How issues with your supervisor can be dealt with

Why counselling may be needed at different stages of the PhD

How to address procrastination

Reflections from a practising counsellor about what university counselling
may offer
The stresses and strains of the birth of a thesis
By now this book should have convinced you that taking on a PhD is an exercise in
emotional and intellectual stamina that is more like an extreme rollercoaster ride
than a pleasant walk in the park.The level of personal commitment needed in order
to succeed is very difficult to express in words as it is like an intangible energy that
propels you forward to the end.What is easier to convey is that at some point along
the line you may well need additional support from your supervisor, and/or family
and friendship networks to deal with the very normal stresses and strains of this intel-
lectual and emotional journey. Nearly all students go through various stages of angst,
insecurity, confusion, isolation and depression at some point. Kurtz-Costes et al.
(2006: 137) note that doctoral students feel the pressure from frequent evaluation,
financial duress, competitive atmosphere, low status and high workload. All these
anxieties are often based on a complex relationship between the personal journey of
doing the PhD, the difficult intellectual task and dealing with the external outside
world which has no real idea what a PhD is!
Do not feel as if you have failed, or that your coping strategies are substandard: the
fact is that doing a PhD is difficult and manoeuvring over and around the emotional
and psychological pitfalls is part of the task. Many of the negative feelings and phases
you will experience can be buffered by your personal and academic support net-
works. For instance, a good old moan to a fellow comrade in the pub, a series of
focused meetings with your supervisor, a holiday (yes – you are allowed to take time
off) or getting further immersed in networking or fieldwork can shift the problem.
But there may be times when you feel that you do not want continually to burden
your partner or friends with the stress of your day job, or you may get fed up with
your mother offering tea and sympathy and feel that an independent and objective
ear would be more helpful.
Sniffing out support
The university counselling services, available in the majority of institutions, may be
able to offer guidance and solutions to your anxieties.The good news is that these
services are offered free of charge at the point of access by most institutions.The dif-
ficult bit is plucking up the courage to go and seek help, admit that the problem is
one that you cannot solve on your own, or even open up about your innermost fears
to a stranger.
BOX 18.1
Find out what support services your institution provides for postgraduates, such as
student advice services, financial advice services and a confidential counselling
service.
The PhD process requires an immense intellectual depth that is usually correctly
assessed at the time of being offered a place to study for a doctorate. In most cases,
the intellectual ability needed to succeed is not what is in question, but problems can
arise when the emotional skills and capacity that are required to go through this
intellectual task are not as robust as they need to be.What is often forgotten by the
outside world is that a doctorate is not really like a job that has a 9–5 structure, or
can be easily switched off in the evenings or during vacations. This is why when
other life stresses are apparent, the PhD candidate may experience issues differently
from someone who is in a regular, mainstream occupation.
Relationships of Support
204
BOX 18.2
Early on, as much as is possible, learn to protect your social and personal time and
space from the demands of your PhD. Try to keep up a balance by remaining involved in
other activities such as sport or hobbies, even if this is at a reduced frequency.
In situations where the normal routes of support such as family and friends or
spending more time with your supervisor do not prevail, specialist help may be
needed.The university setting provides various points of help, such as the Student
Union and the university’s own student support services. Both of these provide paid
staff who can assist with university systems and protocols such as requests for tem-
porary suspension of registration, and complaints procedures. In addition, there are
mainstream support services in the local town/city that can be accessed,through self-
referral or via your GP, irrespective of your postgraduate status. Nevertheless, there
may also be times during the PhD process when you feel that problems are arising
or escalating and that a different kind of assistance is required.
The role of the counsellor
Counsellors are usually employed by the university and so they have a specific
contract with the institution in the same way that the student is also part of the insti-
tution. The services provided are normally on a one-to-one basis for short- or
longer-term contracts, with group counselling sessions as an alternative. Some insti-
tutions offer group work specifically for postgraduates.To reflect the structure of the
PhD, counselling is often available throughout the year, including vacations, recog-
nising that PhDs don’t stop during the summer months!
The fact that the service is ‘internal’ may be a point of anxiety for students
who query issues of confidentiality and what is actually going to happen to the
information imparted. This is a particular issue when the problem is about the
supervisor! Yet, be assured, university counselling services work within a strong
commitment to maintaining confidentiality and abide by a set of ethics that hon-
ours and protects the student’s wishes not to have information revealed to other
persons in the university. Bound by the confidentiality codes set out by professional
bodies (such as the British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy and the
UK Council for Psychotherapy), confidentiality is breached only in rare and
extreme circumstances (and this is most likely to be to a doctor). Counsellors
always seek to discuss widening confidentiality with their clients if at all possible
before doing so. Information is only shared with academic departments with the
consent of the student.
Coping with Stress
205
BOX 18.3
If you are worried about confidentiality and where your personal information will go, then
speak to the staff of the counselling service for reassurance.
Counselling provided within the Higher Education setting has the particular benefit
of being geared to the student experience, especially the somewhat strange (and
strained) lifestyle of the doctoral student. Counsellors in the university setting are well
aware of the lifestyle of a student, who is embroiled in different types of relationships
and protocols, that carry power dynamics perpetuated by the embedded hierarchies
(for instance, based on class, gender and ethnicity) that Higher Education is tradi-
tionally built around. Higher Education is a peculiar setting, with intense relation-
ships with peers and supervisors which are not often mimicked in other areas of life.
Recognising these as common problems that are specific to the student experience
is half the solution.
Counselling provides a safe space to explore your feelings and difficulties with a
view to finding your own solutions. In addition, with your consent, counsellors can
sometimes (depending on the service’s policies) provide relevant evidence if you
want to request special arrangements over deadlines or negotiate time-out from stud-
ies.In this respect,the counsellor can take on a more significant role in terms of prac-
tically supporting the doctoral student to balance coping with the demands of
personal problems alongside those of the PhD in difficult times.
Likely issues – more than a blocked sink
A lot of the issues that counsellors deal with are about personal lives; whether it is a
current relationship breakdown, for example, or experiences in the past that have
come to the fore and need to be dealt with. But equally it is the process of the PhD
and the isolation that often accompanies being a doctoral student that are familiar
reasons for visiting a counsellor, frequently because the student is experiencing anx-
iety or depression. Points of tension can also be the relationship with the supervisor,
relations with peers and how PhD students establish themselves in their department.
The normal external pressures and everyday life events do not go away or become
less significant just because an original piece of academic work is under way. The
Royal College of Psychiatrists (2003) recently alerted medical services to the extent of
mental health problems amongst students in HE.This was associated with the signifi-
cant stress factors of making so many transitions at once. Any stressful life event
(bereavement, relationship breakdown, physical illness, unexpected pregnancy and so
on) can throw the PhD off track. Or overseas students, who may have made consider-
able personal sacrifices (i.e. leaving family behind) to study in the UK, may experience
a ‘cultural disjunction’ between home and their temporary residence (see McNamara
Relationships of Support
206
and Harris, 1997). In addition, deeper more long-standing issues may also come to
the surface for the first time – especially if these are entangled with the research
topic. Problems can re-surface – something that was sorted un-sorts itself owing to
the stress of the PhD. Let’s not forget that the traditional age bracket for doing a PhD
is between 22 and 30, which is a stage of life when one is establishing oneself as an
independent adult.At this stage, identities are often in flux, making the journey of a
PhD possibly more stressful. Sexuality and relationships are often highlighted in this
stage anyway, but coupled with the new experiences that the PhD process brings, a
student can often feel overwhelmed.
BOX 18.4
Doing a PhD can provoke emotional states that may increase your anxieties. Unblocking
your personal issues is often the only way to move the PhD forward.
Many of these types of problems that are unearthed as a result of studying take years
to sort through. Sometimes students do not feel they have the luxury of time to deal
with life issues during the PhD because of the pressure of the three-year deadline.
Unfortunately, emotional healing cannot be fast-tracked and often compartmentali-
sation can be an alternative solution by putting a lid on the issues while work goes
on. Counsellors can support students who choose this coping strategy too.
Financial pressures are never far away from the constant niggles of the postgraduate
lifestyle. Even with studentships and teaching opportunities, money is always tight,
with increasing rents and books to buy. Often part-time jobs are a solution to the
financial difficulties but taking on additional work can also increase the pressure of
having less time to study. Financial pressures are not only current but also cumula-
tive, as often by this stage you have been a student for a number of years, and with
tuition fees, the student debt mounts up. Even though repayment can normally be
suspended during postgraduate study, debts are always looming in the background,
waiting to pounce once a decent salary starts flowing into the current account.
Another issue that is often discussed with a counsellor is that of your changing
role and the conflicts this brings. As a doctoral student you have to make a signifi-
cant shift from the role of the undergraduate, and this can bring with it confusions
in itself. Hockey (1994), in a study titled The Social Organisation of Postgraduate
Training, reported that at the beginning of a PhD research students struggle with the
change in status. Hockey also highlights that ‘the problem which students face is that
their new position is ambiguous, in as much as it is at best only vaguely defined by
university regulations’.
The conflict around status can also be related to taking on a new teaching role.
Taking on an additional pastoral and teaching role brings responsibilities and stress,
Coping with Stress
207
especially if teaching is new.This is a particular concern for those students who have
teaching bursaries and are expected to take on a significant amount of teaching and
marking but at the same time to get their project off the ground. Whether your
undergraduate years were two or ten years ago, there is always some kind of role
change taking place.You may have been a full-time parent or a manager of a com-
pany before you embarked on a PhD.Whatever your change in status, this can bring
with it specific anxieties, so don’t be too harsh on yourself.
BOX 18.5
If you are an older student, remember that all PhD candidates are going through some
kind of role and status change (see Chapters 11 and 17).
Isolation is one of the central problems experienced by doctoral students. The
feeling of having a mountainous task and no one really understanding what this
actually entails is part of the course. Surrounding yourself with people who are
in the same boat is essential, especially for those who are registered part-time.
Community building is initiated in the first year through courses about the PhD
process and other opportunities that encourage communication through peer pre-
sentations and support groups. A range of introductory talks that may seem trivial
(the library tour for instance!) actually enable other essential types of networking.
After the first year, students tend to be geographically spread out because fieldwork
kicks in and people disperse into various fieldwork sites in other localities. So peer
groups have their own ebb and flow as people come and go, making loneliness a
likely friend. Again – this is not just happening to you, so seek out others to share
what’s going on.
The wrath of the supervisor
As a doctoral student you will find your morale and sense of well-being are affected
by your supervisor(s) which in turn influences motivation and focus.As highlighted
in Chapters 3 and 15, establishing an adult relationship – which does not deal only
with the business side of the task but is a holistic working partnership – is the key
to a successful mentoring relationship.The list of potential problems that can arise is
endless, but some of the common pitfalls that can be the reason for seeking coun-
selling are changes in supervisors, people being away and unavailable, serious issues
such as unfair treatment in terms of (for example) racism and sexism, and feeling
inadequately supported.As many universities favour the joint supervision approach,
difficulties can arise for students who are left trying to balance contrasting views of
Relationships of Support
208
two or three supervisors. Fathoming out whose advice is best and trying to meet
even some of their requirements without treading on toes can become stressful.
Relationships of power are endemic in the student–supervisor interaction.Often the
supervisor is a senior member of the academy – perhaps someone whom you have
admired through reading their work and listening to them speak for some years.This
kind of relationship can initially be frozen; you feel you are working with someone so
eminent, or just someone who is so good at their job, that your abilities seem trivial
and inadequate. Such intimidation can usually be managed where there is friendliness,
but where there are issues of approachability or transparency (when you really don’t
know what your supervisor should be doing for you),monthly supervisions can be ter-
rifying! The flipside to this is that you may have a very approachable (often younger)
supervisor who regularly takes you for coffee and asks about your dog but is not an
expert in your field of study and therefore your confidence wanes in their ability to
give advice.With younger supervisors their lack of experience may also trouble you in
terms of their authority, knowledge and track record of getting students to the end.
Sometimes there are others in the department who can offer advice (for instance the
postgraduate tutor), but these stresses can leave scars that may need attention.
BOX 18.6
Be clear from the start with your supervisor about your and their expectations and the
format of the supervision sessions. This sets up boundaries and a precedent early on
(see Chapter 3).
Even when there are no obvious problems with the supervisor, just negotiating
this new type of relationship that is integral to your experience and work is a strange
phenomenon. When rapport is not instantaneous, or the relationship feels far too
much like that of a parent with their child, then there may be perceptions and con-
cerns to unpick.The relationship between the supervisor and PhD student has new
parameters and boundaries that must be negotiated and understood – often implicitly.
The relationship is often at odds with that which you have experienced as an under-
graduate, where the role was very functional and based on seniority.There is a dif-
ferent kind of relationship at the postgraduate level – one where the supervisor may
assume a more pastoral role.This relationship is more of a ‘horizontal’ relationship
where more intimate knowledge about each other’s personal life is shared and the
spaces that the relationship is conducted in move beyond the department to the pub!
This adult-to-adult relationship, where informal socialising is often an important
part, complicates boundaries and in some cases closeness can become a problem as
it transgresses expected boundaries.
Coping with Stress
209
Stages of stress
When considering the stresses associated with the PhD, it is worth realising that
problems can arise at different points.You may have sailed through the first year, col-
lected amazing original data and then hit a sticky point – or indeed the test of charac-
ter could have come in those initial months. Either way, there are some key triggers
when the PhD process can falter, leaving you stuck in the mud.The beginning and the
end appear to be points when students often require additional support.The foundation
year makes a difference to the rest of the experience, so a shaky start could leave inse-
curities. Feeling behind already or realising you are not as suited to the PhD process as
you imagined, can make the second year feel like it will go on forever. However, addi-
tional support,including counselling,is often most needed during the writing up phase,
when there can be both physical and psychological manifestations of stress.Running out
of editing time, or even ideas, putting in monotonous hours in front of the computer,
or requiring extra support from a ‘time-short’ supervisor can all become too much.At
all of these stages,what Hockey (1994:182) has termed ‘a struggle with intellectual self-
worth’ can become the sticking point as we develop a lack of confidence in our ‘intel-
lectual selves’.Additional support may be useful to talk all this through.
Procrastination
The PhD process has inbuilt mechanisms to ensure that procrastination (the avoidance
of doing a task) does not set in or that writer’s block does not spoil the whole enter-
prise. Formal upgrades, progress reports and regular meetings with supervisors, which
include deadlines for short pieces of work, generally map the development of the PhD.
However,from interviews with PhD students,Hockey (1994:181) concludes that ‘time
becomes a source of anxiety’ for the lone scholar. Students are told from the outset that
the expected completion time is three years.When time is pressured so that we feel like
‘every hour counts’,then stagnation for even a week can seem like a long-term procras-
tination problem.This may not necessarily mean that professional help is needed at this
stage but if you feel the problem persists then this is something that perhaps can be
addressed through cognitive behavioural strategies – making simple changes to your
thinking and behaviour that can have positive effects.However,with procrastination also
come feelings of guilt, failure, inadequacy and letting others down.These negative feel-
ings can lead to problems such as depression. Be aware of these potentially damaging
effects of negative feelings about the self and remember there are various sources of help.
BOX 18.7
Always have some administrative tasks to do if writer’s block sets in. Useful tasks include:
sorting out the bibliography, scanning tables of contents of electronic journals, browsing the
library, writing your CV, reading a decent newspaper, writing an abstract for a conference.
Relationships of Support
210
Do not think, however, that all of the issues mentioned above need long-term
intervention to help you find solutions.You may find it only takes a couple of hours
talking to someone impartial about what’s on your mind to help you find a balance.
No magic wands but …
Counselling is a broad umbrella term for a process that can offer the following aspects:
•
A safe, confidential space to off-load.
•
Space to explore feelings and choices of action.
•
Re-framing the problem away from blaming yourself to more constructive thought patterns.
•
Dealing with expectations that are out of proportion.
•
Learning to be self-aware.
•
Learning to be assertive.
•
Adopting new emotional skills and emotional literacy.
•
Accessing other support services within and outside the university.
•
Liaison with supervisors and departments informally and sometimes formally.
•
Time management, stress management and self-care.
•
Group work to share issues and combat isolation.
•
Cognitive behavioural strategies to tackle personal and social anxieties.
Bear in mind that:
•
Many institutions only have a small team of counsellors, so there may be a waiting list
to get seen on an ongoing basis.
•
The counselling provided may only be over a short time period, although there might
be the opportunity to re-access the service later.
BOX 18.8
Lots of people have counselling – it doesn’t mean something is wrong with you!
Key Points to Remember

All students go through some wobbly stages when the emotional and intellectual
strain takes its toll. This is not failure, but part of the process.

Life doesn’t stop and PhDs are not done in a bubble. Other life events may
need addressing through one-to-one support.
Coping with Stress
211

Specific stresses relating to the PhD are isolation, relationships with supervisors,
time and financial pressures, role and status change and procrastination.

Use your friendship and personal networks alongside your academic sources
of support to gain various insights and some perspective on what may seem
like insurmountable hurdles.

Most institutions offer a specific student counselling service that is free at the
point of access.

Counsellors work under strict codes of confidentiality and normally information
is not shared with others unless with your consent.
SUGGESTED READING AND RESOURCES
Hockey, J. (1994) ‘New territory: problems of adjusting to the first year of a
social science PhD’, Studies in Higher Education, 19 (2): 177–190.
McNamara, D. and Harris, E. (1997) Overseas Students in Higher Education:
Issues in Teaching and Learning. London: Routledge.
Perry, A. (2002) Isn’t It About Time? How to Overcome Procrastination and
Get On with Your Life. London: Worth.
www.studentcounselling.co.uk
Guide to problems and solutions
FAQs for students
Relationships of Support
212
Final Thoughts
Having made your way through the many aspects of the PhD we have outlined in
this book, we want to provide you with some final words of reassurance and suppress
any anxieties that may have been raised about the enormity of the task ahead.These
final thoughts are offered in the spirit of wishing you every possible success and
strength for the wonderful journey of gaining the PhD.
Dispelling the myths
What we have tried to do in this book is to dispel some of the lingering myths about
what doing a PhD means, who normally enrols as a PhD research student and the
process of gaining a doctorate.We hope to have taken you through the pitfalls of get-
ting the right supervisor and maintaining good working relationships.We have pro-
vided tips on how to think coherently about your research questions;presenting your
work; how to avoid missing the deadline; and to remember that there are safeguards
and flexibility that you can call on in times of need. Doing a PhD is hard work and
personal circumstances will, in some cases, make the process of doctoral study more
challenging. But be assured, the traditional ‘type’ of student who moves from under-
graduate to postgraduate status within Higher Education in their early 20s is a rare
breed these days. Diversity amongst postgraduates is increasingly the norm.We feel
that there can only be strength in a wide and varied research student base, from
which everyone can give and take support and build those important networks.
Designing your personal strategy
Throughout the chapters, the summary boxes have provided a range of advice, anec-
dotes, strategies and further points of information to help you to build your own per-
sonalised strategy to successfully tackle the hurdles of the PhD. By now you will have
a clear idea of how some of these issues are likely to be raised during your journey.You
will know where your weak points are, be aware of where to seek out support, what
your rights are as a student and your entitlements. We hope we have stirred some
capacity to be proactive about getting what you want at every level.We have dedi-
cated two chapters to the role of the supervisor in the PhD process, which suggests
the importance of this relationship. However, although we have emphasised this as
crucial to your smooth passage through the system, we also want to stress that it is not
uncommon for these relationships not to work out. So when they don’t, please don’t
personalise this too much. Rather, seek out help and find someone more suitable.
Having the correct supervisor and the right sort of supervision is not the only way to
gain support. This is why we have highlighted the importance of networking and
attending postgraduate and discipline-specific events.
Isolation is a significant part of doing a PhD because of the autonomous nature of
the job and the fact that the ultimate responsibility for the whole project comes
down to you.Your personal strategy must include mechanisms to deal with this.
While we have given you plenty of tips on how to design a strategy for your three
years, please also take ideas from our diverse contributors because there is no one set
way of proceeding. Successful strategies can come in many shapes and forms.
The personal and professional journey
We are particularly proud that this book tackles something close to both our own
experiences and beliefs: that the PhD is a personal as well as a professional journey.
We have been keen to include and combine the importance of considering the per-
sonal as well as the professional when designing your own strategies for success at
every stage of the process. At the beginning, having frank discussions with yourself
and your loved ones about what taking on a PhD means will be important because
everyone will have to make sacrifices.Your own personal circumstances that lead you
to enter Higher Education will dictate why you are embarking on this solitary task
and what hurdles may lie ahead. But embrace these challenges as part of the process
and rather than see them as hurdles allow them to be opportunities and chances to
learn more about yourself and your research.This is where ‘reflexivity’really comes into
play, as you will find taking stock important in research as well as in your personal life.
Remember to have fun!
We have deliberately taken a generally serious tone in this book because of the
weightiness of doing a PhD, the scale of the effort required and the fact that some
people never finish because of the difficulties.Yet, here we want to remind you that,
as we can testify, doing a PhD will be an enjoyable experience and very likely a life-
changing one. It is a time for growth, experimentation, newness, socialising, travel
and fun. Don’t be afraid to enjoy! This is the flipside of the sacrifices and compro-
mises you and others will have to make, so when opportunities come by to lighten
the load, do take them.The art of effective time management is being able to have
it all!
Stepping stones
Despite the seriousness of undertaking a doctorate, we do not want you to leave this
book thinking a PhD has to be a masterpiece and therefore might be unachievable.
We offer you this little snapshot from one of our contributors, who sums up how
the PhD should be put into perspective:
Relationships of Support
214
About a month before I was due to start my doctorate, a colleague and mentor
turned to me as we were about to cross the road near Trafalgar Square and said
‘Do your best, enjoy the experience, but remember it isn’t going to be a master-
piece, its just your first step onto the academic career ladder’.
[Justin Waring]
If you are not intending to stay in academia, then the stepping stone principle still
applies.Getting a PhD is just one of the milestones along the personal and professional
journey.
After writing this book, if we were asked to consolidate some general advice for
postgraduate students, we would not re-invent what has been said before but instead
refer you to Les Back (2002). His top ten hints (he calls them aphorisms) for getting
through your PhD are:
1 Trust your own interest
2 Keep a ledger of your thinking
3 Read promiscuously with an open mind
4 Don’t become addicted to the library
5 Don’t be afraid to get close to the thing you’re trying to understand
6 Don’t become a fieldwork junkie
7 Embrace the challenge of becoming a writer
8 Don’t carry the burden of originality
9 Don’t try to judge your own work
10 Have faith in the value of what you are doing
These are useful nuggets of advice to follow and incorporate into your own per-
sonal strategy. Finally, remember where you are heading and, in those times when
you want to pack it all in, remember:
By completing our studies, our intellectual skills become honed and nurtured; our
research techniques, whether empirical or theoretical, are developed and proven;
our managerial, administrative and teaching abilities are enhanced; and our findings
and ideas are worked-up to a standard that awards a doctorate. We therefore have
much to offer.
[Justin Waring]
Final Thoughts
215
References
Arksey, H. and Knight, P. (1999) Interviewing for Social Scientists. London: Sage.
Arnold, J. (1997) Managing Careers into the 21st Century. London: Paul Chapman.
Atkinson, P., Coffey, A., Delamont, S., Lofland, J. and Lofland, L. (2001) Handbook of
Ethnography. London: Sage.
Back, L. (2002) ‘Dancing and wrestling with scholarship:Things to do and things to avoid in
a PhD career’, Sociological Research Online, 7 (4) at www.sociologicalonline.org.uk/7/4/back.
html
Back, L. (2004) ‘Ivory Towers? The academy and racism’, in I. Law, D. Phillips and L.Turney
(eds), Institutional Racism in Higher Education. Stoke-on-Trent:Trentham Books. pp. 1–6.
Becher, T., Henkel, M. and Kogan, M. (1994) Graduate Education in Britain. London: Jessica
Kingsley.
Becker, L. (2004) How to Manage Your Postgraduate Course. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Blaikie, N. (2000) Designing Social Research: The Logic of Anticipation. Malden: Polity Press.
Blaikie, N. (2003) Analysing Quantitative Data. London: Sage.
Boice,R.(1994) How Writers Journey to Comfort and Fluency: A Psychological Adventure.London:
Praeger.
Bourner,T., Bowden, R. and Laing, S. (2001) ‘Professional doctorates in England’, Studies in
Higher Education, 26(1): 65–83.
Britton, C. and Baxter, A. (1999) Becoming a Mature Student: Gendered Narratives of the
self. Gender and Education, 11(2): 179–193.
Collinson, J. (2003) ‘Working at a marginal “career”: the case of UK social science contract
researchers’, Sociological Review, 51(3): 405–422.
Coomber, R. (2002) ‘Signing your life away? Why Research Ethics Committees (REC)
shouldn’t always require written confirmation that participants in research have been
informed of the aims of study and their rights – the case of criminal populations’, Sociological
Research Online, 7(1) at www.socresonline. org.uk/7/1/coomber.html
Crang, M. and Cook, I. (2006) Doing Ethnographies. London: Sage.
Crow, G., Wiles, R., Heath, S. and Charles, V. (2006) ‘Research ethics and data quality:
the implications of informed consent’, International Journal of Social Research Methodology,
9(2): 83–95.
Curnock,A. (1996) Quantitative Methods in Business. Cheltenham: Stanley Thornes.
Dearing Report (1997) Higher Education in the Learning Society. Available at www.ncl.
ac.uk/niche/sr_008.htm
Delamont, S., Atkinson, S. and Parry, O. (1998) Supervising the PhD: A Guide to Success, 2nd
edn, Buckingham: Open University Press.
Department for Education and Skills (2003) The Future of Higher Education. London: HMSO.
Edwards, R. (1993) Mature Women Students. London:Taylor and Francis.
Elbow, P. (1973) Writing Without Teachers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Employed Postgraduates’ Charter (2003) www.npc.org.uk/page/1050329840
References
217
Finch,J.(2003) ‘Foreword:Why be interested in women’s position in academe?’,Gender, Work
and Organization, 10(2): 133–136.
Gibbs, G. and Coffey, M. (2004) ‘The impact of training of university teachers on their teach-
ing skills, their approach to teaching and the approach to learning of their students’, Active
Learning in Higher Education, 5(1): 87–100.
Graves, N. and Varma,V. (1997) Working for a Doctorate: A Guide for the Humanities and Social
Sciences. Routledge: London.
Harland,T. and Plangger, G. (2004) ‘The postgraduate chameleon’, Active Learning in Higher
Education, 5(1): 73–86.
Hartley,J.and Fox,C.(2004) ‘Assessing the mock viva:the experiences of British doctoral stu-
dents’, Studies in Higher Education, 29(6): 727–738.
Higher Education Statistics Agency (2005) Online Information Service, Student Data Tables.
www.hesa.ac.uk/holisdocs
Hockey, J. (1994) ‘New territory: problems of adjusting to the first year of a social science
PhD’, Studies in Higher Education, 19(2): 177–190.
Holt,S.(1999) Preparing Postgraduates to Teach in Higher Education.Coventry:Council for Graduate
Education.
Howard, K., Sharp, J.A. and Peters, J. (eds) (2002) The Management of a Student Research Project.
Aldershot: Gower Publishing.
Jackson, C. and Tinkler, P. (2001) ‘Back to basics: a consideration of the purposes of the PhD
viva’, Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, 26(4): 355–366.
Joint Statement of the UK Research Councils? Training Requirements for Research
Students, (2001) The UK grad programme, www.grad.ac.uk
Kurtz-Costes,B.,Andrews Helmke,L.and Ulku-Steiner,B.(2006) ‘Gender and doctoral stud-
ies:the perceptions of PhD students in an American university’,Gender and Education,18(2):
137–155.
Le Voi, M. (2002) ‘Responsibilities, rights and ethics’, in S. Potter (ed.), Doing Postgraduate
Research. London: Open University and Sage. pp. 153–163.
Lee-Treweek, G. and Linkogle, S. (2000) Danger in the Field: Risk and Ethics in Social Research.
London: Routledge.
Leonard, D. (2001) A Woman’s Guide to Doctoral Studies. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Lester, S. (2004) ‘Conceptualizing the practitioner doctorate’, Studies in Higher Education,
29(6): 757–770.
Letherby, G. (2003) Feminist Research in Theory and Practice. Maidenhead: Open University
Press.
Marks,A. (2003) ‘Welcome to the new ambivalence: reflections on the historical and current
cultural antagonism between the working class and higher education’, British Journal of
Sociology of Education, 24(1): 83–93.
Mason, J. (2002) Qualitative Researching, 2nd edn. London: Sage.
McNamara, D. and Harris, R. (1997) Overseas Students in Higher Education: Issues in Teaching
and Learning. London: Routledge.
Metcalfe Report (2002) www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/hefce
Miller, T. and Bell, L. (2002) ‘Consenting to what? Issues of access, gate-keeping and
“Informed”consent’,in M.Mauthner,M.Birch,J.Jessop and T.Miller (eds),Ethics in Qualitative
Research. London: Sage.
Morley,L.(1999) Organising Feminisms: The Micro-Politics of the Academy.New York:St Martin’s
Press.
Morss, K. and Murray, R. (2005) Teaching at University: A Guide for Postgraduates and Research.
London: Sage.
Murray, R. (2002) How to Write a Thesis. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Murray, R. (2003) How to Survive Your Viva: Defending a Thesis in an Oral Examination.
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Murray, R. (2004) Writing for Academic Journals. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Osborne, M., Marks,A. and Turner,A. (2004) ‘Becoming a mature student: how adult applicants
weigh the advantages and disadvantages of Higher Education’, Higher Education, 48(3):
291–315.
Phillips, E. and Pugh, D. (2005) How to Get a PhD, 4th edn. Maidenhead: Open University
Press/McGraw-Hill Education.
Punch, K.F. (2000) Developing Effective Research Proposals. London: Sage.
Quality Assurance Agency (2004) Code of practice for the Assurance of Academic Quality and
Standards in Higher Education.http://www.qaa.ac.uk/academicinfrastructure/codeofpractice/
Raddon, A. (2002) ‘Mothers in the academy: positioned and positioning within discourses
of the “successful academic” and the “good mother”, Studies in Higher Education, 27(3):
387–403.
Rangasamy, J. (2004) ‘Understanding institutional racism’, in I. Law, D. Phillips and L.Turney
(eds), Institutional Racism in Higher Education. Stoke-on-Trent:Trentham Books. pp. 27–34.
Ribbens, J. and Edwards, R. (eds) (1998) Feminist Dilemmas in Qualitative Research. London:
Sage.
Rickards,T. (1992) How to Win as a Mature Student, London: Kogan Press.
Roberts Review (2002) SET for Success: The Supply of People with Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematical Skills. Report of Sir Gareth Roberts’ Review, 15 April 2002. www.hm-
treasury.gov.uk
Robertson, J.and Bond,C.(2001) ‘Experiences of the relation between teaching and research:
what do academics value?’, Higher Education Research and Development, 20(1): 5–19.
Rugg, G. and Petre, M. (2004) The Unwritten Rules of PhD Research. Maidenhead: Open
University Press.
Sanders,T. (2005) ‘Researching sex work: dynamics, difficulties and decisions’, in D. Hobbs
and R.Wright (eds), A Sage Handbook of Fieldwork. London: Sage.
Sanders,T. (2006) ‘Sexing up the subject: methodological nuances in researching the female
sex industry’, Sexualities, 9(4): 449–468.
Tinkler, P. and Jackson, C. (2004) The Doctoral Examination Process. Maidenhead: Open
University Press.
UK Grad Programme (2004) A National Review of Emerging Practice on the Use of Personal
Development Planning for Post Graduate Researchers. www.ukgrad.ac.uk
Wellington,J.,Bathmaker,A.,Hunt,C.,McCulloch,G.and Sikes,P.(2005) Succeeding with Your
Doctorate. Sage Study Skills. London: Sage.
Wilkinson, D. (2005) The Essential Guide to Postgraduate Study. Sage Study Skills. London:
Sage.
Wisker, G. (2001) The Postgraduate Research Handbook. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Wright,T. and Cochrane, R. (2000) ‘Factors influencing successful submission of PhD theses’,
Studies in Higher Education, 25(2): 181–195.
Getting Your PhD
218
Appendix 1
Example of an Informed
Consent Form
My name is Sharon Elley and the purpose of this consent form is to tell you of your
rights as a participant in this study and of the procedures involved in the collection and
keeping of data about yourself. I am interested in young people’s views on sexuality, sex
and relationship education, and sexual relationships. I would be very grateful for your
participation in this study.
Research and what you need to know
• It is your right not to answer any question that you are asked
• You may ask the researcher any questions you have
• You are free to end your participation in the interview at any time without giving a
reason and without any consequences
• Your name and identity will be changed so no one will be able to recognize you in the
study and you are guaranteed confidentiality in any discussions and publications in
agreement with the Data Protection Act 1998
• No information will be passed onto anyone connected with you, including parents or school
• If you are under 18 and disclose physical, mental or sexual abuse I cannot guarantee
confidentiality and this will be passed on to the appropriate persons 
• The interview will be recorded using audio tape and all notes and tapes will be kept
in a safe place
• You have the right to access the data about yourself and to ask for it to be returned
to you at any time
I have read this consent form in full. I have had the chance to ask questions concern-
ing any areas that I did not understand. I consent to being a participant in the study:
Signature of participant:
Printed name of participant:
Date of interview:
Signature of interviewer:
If you want to confirm that I am a research student at the University of Leeds, Department
of Sociology and Social Policy, please contact [my supervisor] on: [phone number]
Appendix 2
Example of an Information Sheet
Young People’s Views about Sex and Relationships
I am Sharon Elley and I would like to invite you to take part in some research that is
all about YOU and YOUR VIEWS about sex and relationships in general. YOUR opin-
ions are what counts and you receive a £5.00 voucher. It’s easy, it only takes about
half an hour to an hour and it’s up to you.
My research project aims to find out about:
• What sex education you had at school?
• What you learnt from your sex education classes?
• Whether sex education influences what you do?
• What you think about close relationships?
You can help by taking part in this research and telling me your views. You can do this by:
• Taking part in a group discussion with your friends
• Taking part in a discussion on your own with me in privacy
Any information you give me will be strictly confidential. This means:
• None of the information will have your name on it
• No information will be shown to parents or anyone else who knows you
• No one will be able to identify you in anything written
You will not have to answer any questions that you do not want to.
If you are interested in having your say then please contact me on: [phone number]
If you want to confirm that I am a research student at the University of Leeds,
Department of Sociology and Social Policy, please contact [my supervisor] on: [phone
number]
Thank you
Index
accountability of researcher 52
anonymity 49–51, 54
anxiety see stress
bursaries 153
CAQDAS 63–5, 66, 67
careers and career development
job search 122–6
job-related research 18–19, 134,
137–8, 141, 165
as motivating factor 14–15
non-academic 124–5
and publishing 85, 121
childcare 192, 198, 199–200
codes of practice 53–4, 185, 187
coding data 65–7
conferences 92–3, 100–1
papers 79–80, 101
confidentiality 49–51
student counselling 205–6
contract research 123–4
counselling 200–1, 204–5
confidentiality 205–6
likely issues 206–8, 211
covert research 51–2
criticism see peer review
curriculum vitae 34, 85, 122, 123, 156–7
data and data analysis 58–69
anonymising 50
coding 65–7
collection to analysis 61–2
ethics as part of 47
field notes and transcripts 62–3
focusing and research findings 67–8
hindered by informed consent 48
prior to research question 23, 26
record keeping and secure storage 49, 63
software 64–5
time constraints 60–1, 67, 107, 145
types of 58–60, 62
validity and reliability 68–9
data protection 49, 51, 54
deadlines
guidance and support 106–7, 112–13
management/goal setting 107–9, 110–12
personal circumstances 109–10
regulations 111–12
submission rates 105–6
Dearing Report 185
disabled students 190–2
discrimination 132, 185–6, 208
distance learning 129, 140, 161
doctoral studies see post-graduate
training
‘Duty of Care’ 50, 55
Economic and Social Research
Council 6
emotions 163–72
in the field 167–8
holistic view of PhD process 163–4
managing emotions 170–1
motivation and life experiences 165–7
self-doubt and anxiety 168–70, 210
see also stress
Employed Postgraduates’ Charter 150–1
enabling research environments 185–93
epistemology 32
Esharp 87
ethics 45–57
complicating factors 51–2
confidentiality and anonymity 49–51
data protection 49, 51, 54
informed consent 47–9
personal 55–6
relevance to research 45–7
Research Ethics Committees 51, 53–5
ethnographic methods 52
examination see viva
exploitation 185, 188–9
family commitments 194–202
accommodation 201
advice and information 200–1
childcare 192, 198, 199–200
complementing research 199
family commitments cont.
financial support 201
parental experiences 195–8
female students 131–2
field of study 24
fieldwork
field notes 62–3
and part-time study 145
personal emotions 167–8
personal safety 55–6
preliminary 23, 26
finance and funding 6, 17, 191, 201, 207
focal research questions 24
free writing 76
generative writing 76
goal setting 107–9, 110–12, 148
grey literature 88
information sheet 220
informed consent 47–9, 219
institutional responsibilities 185–8
isolation 135, 143–4, 206, 208
job search 122–5
joint supervision 33, 177
learning agreement 182
legislation see regulations
life experiences 15–16, 165–7
literature review/overview 24–6, 89
loneliness see isolation
management see project management;
time management
ManuScript 88
marking 160–1
mature students see older students
mentors see supervisors
Metcalfe Report 176
motivation
core reasons 13–17, 20
and life experiences 15–16, 165–6
older students 130–1
part-time study 141
National Union of Students 192, 200
networking 71–2, 95–104
anxieties and relationships 96–7, 98–9
benefits of 95–6, 100
constraints and commitments 102–3
isolation/loneliness 135
non-academic groups 101–2
part-time study 148–9
peers and own university 99–100
and publishing 92–3
networking cont.
research communities 97–9
seminars, conferences and workshops 100–2
NUD*IST 63–4
older students 129–39
isolation/loneliness 135
personal circumstances 131–2, 195,
196, 197–8
professional doctorates 137–8
role and status change 208
transfer of job skills 132–4
ontology 31
Open University 140, 161
oral examination see viva
papers and publishing 71–2, 83–94
career development 85
co-authorship 87
conferences 79–80, 92–3, 101
content of papers 84
criticism/peer review 84–5, 88, 90–2
hierarchy of 87
publishing process 89–90
rejection 90–1
self-confidence 84
thematic papers 67–8, 78
timing 83, 85, 86, 88
what/where to publish 86–8
part-time study 4, 140–9, 165
coping with isolation 143–4
distance learning 129, 140, 165
motivation and preparation 141–2
prioritisation 146–7
supervision 180, 188–9
support and networking 148–9
time management 144–6, 147–8
peer networking 99
peer review/criticism 84–5, 88, 90–2, 181
perfectionism 108–9
personal agenda 15–16
personal circumstances 102–3,
109–10, 113
disabled students 190–2
family commitments 194–202
older students 131–2
part-timers 144, 146–7
Personal Development Planning 7
personal experiences see emotions
politics
and passion in topic choice 19–20
research as 16
post-graduate training 2–4
changing framework 4–6
institutional responsibilities 185–8
transferable skills 5–6, 132–4
Getting Your PhD
222
Postgraduate Forum 88
procrastination 210–11
professional doctorates 137–8
project management 76, 107–9, 110–12,
136, 182–4
part-timers 146–7
publishing see papers and publishing
qualitative analysis 59–60, 62
Quality Assurance Agency 185
quantitative data
analysing 59–60, 62
presenting and describing 77–8
record keeping 49, 63
regulations and policies 6, 78–9, 111–12,
116, 185–6
codes of practice 53–4, 185, 187
equal opportunities 186–8
reliability of data 68–9
Research Ethics Committees 51, 53–5
research notes 86
research questions 22–32
distinguishing title and area 24
feasibility and resources 30–1
and life experiences 165–7
literature search/overview 24–6
ontology and epistemology 31–2
originality 29–30
precision/restrictiveness 27–9
and preliminary fieldwork 26
progressive focusing 22–4, 27
quantitative thinking 27
research topic, choice of 17–20
resources, access to 156, 189–92
‘Respect Code of Practice for
Socio-Economic Research’ 53
responsibilities
institutional 185–8
student 182
Roberts Review 5, 7
safety, personal 55–6
seminars 100–1
and teaching 152, 157
‘SET for Success’ 5, 7
skills, transferable 5–6, 132–4
software 63–5
SPSS 63–5
stress 203–12
common issues 206–10
counselling services 204–6
and family commitments 195–7
self-doubt and anxiety 168–71, 210
stages in 210–11
of teaching 158–9
student numbers 4
student rights 192–3
submission dates 115, 116
submission rates 105–6
supervisors and supervision 33–44, 175–84
changing supervisors 39–43, 44
choosing/being allocated 33–6, 43
expectations and good practice 180–3
formal complaints 39, 44
guidance and support 106–7, 112–13
joint supervision 33, 177
ownership of research process 182–4
part-time study 149, 180, 188–9
quality and accountability 6, 40, 176–7
single supervision 177
student-supervisor relationships
34–44, 175–6, 188, 205, 208–9
student’s responsibilities 182
supervisor’s self-interests 181–2
supervisory styles 178–9
team supervision 178
support services 188, 189–92
advice and information 200–1
childcare 199–200
student rights 192–3
targets see goal setting
teaching 150–62
career development 156–7
common tasks 152–3
conditions of service 150, 153
evaluation of 156–7
lack of availability 161
personal and research benefits 154–7
stress 158–9, 207–8
time management 157–61
training for 151, 153
team supervision 178
thematic working papers 67–8, 78
time management
data handling 60–1, 67, 107–8
family commitments 196–7, 198
part-timers 144–6, 147–8
procrastination 210–11
project feasibility 30–1
supervision 183
teaching duties 157–61
working from home 136–7
see also deadlines
training see post-graduate training
transcripts 62–3
tutorial work 152
validity of data 68–9
viva, the 115–26
oral examination 119–20
Index
223
viva, the cont.
post viva matters 120–6
preparation for 117–19
submission dates 115, 116
views of 116–17
welfare see support services
women in education 131–2
work skills, transfer of 132–4
writing up 71–2, 73–82
chapter specifics 80–1
free writing 76–7
global planning 79–80
writing up cont.
key roles of writing 73–4, 123
managing the process 76, 136–7
perfectionism 108–9
generative writing 76–7
quantitative data 77–8
regulations and conventions 78–9
supervisory meetings 180
thematic papers 67–8, 78
value of early start 74–6
working from home 136
writer’s block 81, 210
Getting Your PhD
224
